---
title: "Budget 2005 great for Auckland Central"
date: 2005-05-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23164
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

This year's budget invests responsibly in the health, education and safety of the people of Auckland Central and supports the economic future of the region, says Auckland Central MP Judith Tizard.

"New Zealand's economy has done well under this government, enabling us all to benefit from improved public services," Judith Tizard said.

"That record continues with new funding this year for healthcare, early childhood education, schools and the Police.

"Health funding will rise by an unprecedented $4 billion over the next four years. This includes money to extend low-cost primary care, establish a Cancer Control Council, offer free breast screening to more women, phase out asset testing for older people in rest homes, pay nurses more, and fund more hip and major joint operations.

"Investment in education is focussed on improving quality, from early childhood to the tertiary sector. Childcare centres are getting more funding to pay for better-qualified staff. Schools are being funded to employ more teachers, increase their operating budgets and invest in new technology.

"New funding for higher education is targeted at better quality teaching in strategically vital subjects, including science, trades, technical subjects, agriculture and horticulture. There is also more money for Modern Apprenticeships and industry training, while tertiary students will benefit from new scholarships and changes to allowances."

Judith Tizard said increased funding for the Police would ensure the force had the resources necessary to keep on top of crime rates, which are the lowest in decades. New money in the budget will pay for an estimated 245 more police nationwide in the coming year.

"The budget also creates new opportunities for people to improve their financial security, with the introduction of the KiwiSaver workplace savings scheme. This will help New Zealanders save for their retirement, with a $1000 kick-start from the government.

"People struggling to save for their first home will also be able to take advantage of KiwiSaver, which will help many with an extra contribution towards their deposit. An expanded Mortgage Insurance Scheme will offer another form of assistance for homebuyers."

While delivering better services, the government continues to take a responsible approach to public spending, says Judith Tizard. Forecasts show budget surpluses will continue to cover the contributions to the NZ Superannuation Fund, keep the national debt down and enable investment in essential infrastructure like roading.

"This budget also provides substantial tax relief for business and changes to personal income tax thresholds that will protect people's incomes against inflation. Altogether it is a balanced investment in the nation's social and economic future," Judith Tizard said.