---
title: "Outstanding results in New Zealand Music Month Quiz"
date: 2005-05-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23056
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

The results are in, and for the first time ever in the quiz's five year history, three MPs have scored 100 per cent in Judith Tizard’s New Zealand Music Month quiz - Steve Maharey, Murray Smith and Pete Hodgson.

"I am absolutely delighted with the results of the quiz this year," Judith Tizard said.

"Most of the MPs sought help from staff or family members, but whether they already knew the answers, asked around or did their research, I’m pleased that my colleagues took such an interest in wanting to get the answers right.

"The point of the exercise was to get MPs thinking about the fantastic range of music on offer in this country during New Zealand Music Month.

"I congratulate all who entered and I hope they enjoyed finding out more about the wonderful New Zealand music that surrounds us," Judith Tizard said.

**The results:**

**1st Equal** – Pete Hodgson; Steve Maharey, Murray Smith – (27/27)  
**2nd Equal** – Jim Anderton; Mark Burton; Pita Paraone; Mita Ririnui; (26/27)  
**3rd Equal** – Peter Dunne; Ruth Dyson; Marian Hobbs, Trevor Mallard, Jim Peters; Judy Turner (25/27)

**Fo' shizzle ma nizzle award:** To Peter Dunne and Judy Turner for knowing that Jonah Lomu featured in Dei Hamo's other well-known music video 'To Tha Floor'.

**Kudos award:** To Judy Turner - her son Josh was part of the answer to question number three: 'Name five students who had their singles recorded for the 'Play It Strange Top 20 Volume I' CD.'

**Dub award 'down with the reggae beats':** To Jim Anderton and Lesley Soper for writing that Tiki Taane is also known as 'MC Rizzla'.

**Most improved participant:** Georgina Te Heuheu

**NZ MUSIC MONTH QUIZ ANSWERS:**

01. They collected 'Best Group' and 'Best Rock Album' for 'You've Got to Hear the Music' at the 2004 Vodafone NZ Music Awards. Name the band.  
    **Dimmer**
02. Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, Dame Malvina Major and Jonathon Lemalu have all been previous winners of the Song Quest competition. Name the singer who won the 2005 Lexus Song Quest?  
    **Madeleine Pierard**
03. The 2004 Play It Strange Secondary School's Songwriting Competition produced some stunning results. Name five students who had their singles recorded for the 'Play It Strange Top 20 Volume I' CD.  
    **Josh Turner**  
    **Justin Pitt and Ben Shuker**  
    **Sam George-Ellen**  
    **Jeff Parsons**  
    **Yhana Rewiti**  
    **Kimbra Johnson**  
    **Dena Valente**  
    **Rose Young and Graci Mills**  
    **Emma Amiri-Ghaemmaghamy**  
    **Daniel Pohiwi**  
    **Georgie Olsen**  
    **Rangi Phillips and Robert Werahiko**  
    **Lydia Gammie**  
    **Charles Wilkie**  
    **Jeremy Hay and Stephen Hay**  
    **Anthonie Tonnon and Dylan Conley**  
    **Rachel Helms and Steven Gibbs**  
    **Lucy G**  
    **Teresa Bergman**  
    **Kristy Hanna**
04. Auckland-based globetrotting band The D4 have just released their second album 'Out of My Head'. The first single was released in both English and Japanese - can you name the song?  
    **Sake Bomb**
05. Name the well-known musician who received the New Zealand Order of Merit (MNZM) for her services to both Maori and Music and was the first non-American to win a major USA based songwriting contest with her song Moko, in 2004.  
    **Moana Maniapoto**
06. The title of Pluto's recently released second album is an acronym - what is the record called?  
    **Pipeline Under the Ocean**
07. Name the New Zealand composer who wrote 'View from Olympus'?  
    **John Psathas**
08. Steriogram's woolly video was nominated for 4 MTV awards and a Grammy. What is the name of the single?  
    **Walkie Talkie Man**
09. Evermore's debut album 'Dreams' has just recently achieved Gold Sales status in Australia, with over 35,000 copies sold. Where does the band come from?  
    **Feilding**
10. The nominees for Best Male Pacific Artist at the inaugural Pacific Music Awards this year had sold a combined 135,000 records between them. Name the nominees.  
    **Dei Hamo, Scribe and Kas Futialo aka 'Tha Feelstyle'**
11. The percentage of New Zealand music played on the radio hit an all time high last NZ Music Month – can you name the percentage?  
    **25.47%**
12. Name the singer who is a member of Salmonella Dub, but who has also performed with Concord Dawn and Rhombus?  
    **Tiki Taane**
13. Chris Knox is a well-known artist in his own right, but he is also known for his work with bands The Enemy, Toy Love and Tall Dwarfs. Which one of these bands has recently re-issued its one-and-only album 25 years after it was first released?  
    **Toy Love**
14. What Wellington based band contains the son of legendary political satirist Tom Scott?  
    **Phoenix Foundation (Sam Scott)**
15. Can you name the New Zealand band that, after playing at the Resonate showcase in Auckland in March, has been invited to perform on the NME New Music Tour in May this year?  
    **The Checks**
16. In August this year, the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra is going to travel to Europe and Japan, which will be the largest international tour it has ever undertaken. During its tour to Europe, the NZSO will perform in a venue that celebrated its centenary in 1988 and is home to one of the world's greatest orchestras. Name the venue.  
    **Het Concertgebouw**
17. Name works by two NZ composers that the NZSO will be playing on its tour to Europe and Japan later this year.  
    **Music for Jonny by Ross Harris**  
    **Symphony No. 3 by Douglas Lilburn**  
    **Naga Baba by Gareth Farr**
18. 'Positively George Street' is the title of a compilation CD by which former band from Dunedin?  
    **Sneaky Feelings**
19. Name the New Zealand sporting celebrity who features in Dei Hamo's music video "We Gon Ride"?  
    **Matthew Ridge**
20. Minister for Auckland Issues question: Hip Hop artist Savage is signed with the Auckland record label Dawn Raid Entertainment and he has just released his first debut album 'Moonshine'. What are the words tattooed on his right forearm?  
    **"South Auckland''**

For regular updates on NZ Music Month activities, visit [www.nzmusicmonth.co.nz]()."&gt;NZ On Air and the [NZ Music Industry Commission](http:).