---
title: "Support boosted for arts and heritage organisations"
date: 2005-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23078
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

The Prime Minister Helen Clark today announced increases to baseline funding for leading arts, culture and heritage organisations, as part of Budget 2005.

- Te Papa - an additional $12 million in capital funding over the next four years has been approved to support Te Papa’s projected five year capital plan to maintain the optimum museum experience.
- Creative New Zealand – an additional $950,000 per annum (GST exclusive) for baseline funding from 2005/06 for organisational capacity. This includes a mix of increased revenue to sustain current activity levels and new positions to advance a key arts marketing and development initiative.
- New Zealand Symphony Orchestra – an additional $1.6 million in 2005/06 increasing to $2.2 million in 2006/07 (GST exclusive) and out years to maintain the orchestra’s current capacity and performance.

Creative New Zealand will also receive;

- $2.6 million (GST exclusive) as a one-off appropriation in 2005/06 to enable it to provide funding for some of New Zealand’s key performing arts organisations.
- $788,000 as a one-off appropriation for 2005/06 for capital funding to upgrade Wellington's Old Public Trust Building, which is partly owned by Creative New Zealand. The funding will also help develop the organisation's IT capacity, to improve the way it manages relationships with clients.

Top-up funding for agencies funded by the Lottery Grants Board

- $2.6 million (GST exclusive) as a one-off appropriation in 2005/06 to maintain funding levels for agencies funded by New Zealand Lottery Grants Board – Creative New Zealand, the New Zealand Film Commission and the New Zealand Film Archive - to cover the anticipated reduction in their income from the Lottery Grants Board.

"Te Papa, Creative New Zealand, and the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra are key public institutions and the government is committed to their success," Helen Clark said.