---
title: "Ministry restructured to boost youth opportunities"
date: 2005-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23173
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Youth Affairs
---

The government's work to provide opportunities for young New Zealanders will be strengthened through structural and funding changes to the Ministry of Youth Development, Youth Affairs Minister Steve Maharey announced today.

The changes will see the Ministry establish a regional presence in four centres around New Zealand and will include a strengthening of its existing youth programmes like Conservation Corps and Youth Service Corps.

Announcing the changes in Wellington today, Steve Maharey said the Ministry will now be able to provide leadership for the growing networks of youth agencies and services being established throughout the country.

"The success of our young people is crucial to our success as a nation," Steve Maharey said. "The changes I've announced today will allow the Ministry of Youth Development to play a leading role in providing opportunities for young New Zealanders.

"Most youth agencies are operating at a community-level. The new regional structure will allow these agencies to better access the knowledge and expertise being generated by the Ministry's national base."

The changes include:

?œ The establishment of four regional MYD hubs staffed by teams of regional youth advisors. The first will be established in Auckland later this year, followed by Christchurch, Rotorua and Wellington next year.

?œ MYD will improve its existing youth programmes such as the New Zealand Conservation Corps, Youth Service Corps and Specialist Youth Service Corps. These programmes provide work, life and education skills for around 2000 young people every year.

?œ New programmes and services will be funded by MYD to better meet local needs and circumstances.