---
title: "Racing Minister atones"
date: 2005-05-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23240
ministers:
  - Damien O'Connor
portfolios:
  - Racing
---

Minister for Racing Damien O’Connor today atoned for his comments about the tax-free status of stake money.

In a midday Radio Trackside interview with Karyn Fenton-Ellis, the Minister said that he regretted his recent comment about the tax-free status of stake monies and acknowledged that he had ruffled some feathers within the industry.

“Racehorse ownership has always been considered a hobby. This is because, on average, the costs outweigh the returns via stakes. While there is a substantial industry built around racing, we can’t get away from the fact that it is based on risk,” Mr O’Connor said.

He noted that there are very few racing jurisdictions where the cost equation goes the other way.

“Hong Kong enjoys a massive gambling base to support a relatively limited number of races at just two tracks. In comparison, New Zealand has a large number of races supported by a small gambling base. This is clearly putting the squeeze on returns to owners.

“Even the Australians, the Irish and the Brits are unable to make stake money cover the costs associated with keeping and training horses.”

The Minister identified this as one of the key issues facing the industry. The NZ Racing Board has advised him that owners’ returns must be increased and he agrees that this is a challenge for both racing and the Government.

“The Government wants to see New Zealand racing thrive and will play its part. However, there also has to be improved industry performance.

“I am pleased that the Board has identified a number of positive strategies that will allow it to increase stakes and lead to the industry delivering on its economic potential. These strategies include presenting a more attractive betting product and making targeted capital improvements.”

The Board has presented a plan to the Government that will lift the industry’s performance. The initial cost of the plan for the Government would be up to $35m per annum.

“The Government needs to be certain that this will have a positive impact on racing and the economy. The official analysis of the Board’s submission will be competed in the next few months and I am optimistic that it will show that racing has a good case.”