---
title: "Budget funds more Court security staff"
date: 2005-05-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23120
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Courts
---

Budget 2005 will improve court safety by funding eighteen more security officers to work in courts around the country.

Courts Minister Rick Barker says the additional security staff will complement other security improvement initiatives he is driving such as new security entrances, more x-ray scanner equipment and additional surveillance cameras.

"The 18 extra positions will introduce new security staff to Whangarei, Napier and Wanganui courts, and add extra staff in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch," said Rick Barker. "The annual cost will be around $1 million."

An analysis of 2003 shows 22 of 68 serious incidents were minimised because there was a security officer. Security officers removed more than 1000 items in 2003, ranging from weapons to spray cans. They also removed more than 200 people from the court who were causing problems.

"People must feel safe when using the court system. We want to ensure the public trusts our justice institutions by improving security and reducing extra stress when possible. More security staff will make our courts safer for the public, staff, and the judiciary."

The government is also working towards having all court buildings with a single, secure entry.

"The entry systems will work very much like airports, with a scanner at the entry. Manual bag searches at courts have already dramatically reduced graffiti and the carrying of offensive weapons."

Security officers were introduced to courts in 2000 and there are currently 34 staff nationwide. The new funding will increase the number by 50 per cent, to 52 officers.