---
title: "PM to visit China and Japan"
date: 2005-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23175
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark will visit China and Japan between 30 May and 4 June.

Helen Clark said that China and Japan are major global players, and major regional and trade partners for New Zealand.

In Beijing Helen Clark will meet President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao.

“These meetings will be an opportunity to reaffirm the importance New Zealand places on its relationship with China, to discuss progress on the free trade agreement negotiations, and to discuss significant regional and international issues.

“I will also be promoting New Zealand’s trade with China at a business event with Chinese company representatives and officials.

“China is now New Zealand’s fourth largest trade partner. New Zealand’s exports to China totalled $1.74 billion in the year ending December 2004, and two-way trade for that year stood at over $5 billion.

“Negotiations on an FTA are progressing well, with the third round of talks getting under way in Wellington last week.”

In Beijing Helen Clark will also support New Zealand’s education links with China by launching a China-New Zealand alumni network at an education sector lunch, and make industry visits, including a call on one of China’s largest furniture manufacturers.

In Japan Helen Clark expects to meet with Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi and other ministers, and attend New Zealand’s ‘national day’ at the Aichi World Expo on 3 June. The programme for Aichi also includes a reception aboard HMNZS Te Mana.

More than 100 countries are participating in the Expo, including Australia, Canada, many Asian countries and most members of the European Union.

“Japan is New Zealand’s third largest trade partner, with our exports for the year ending December 2004 totalling $3.44 billion, and imports totalling $3.89 billion.

“The bilateral relationship in all its aspects, and discussion on regional and international issues will also feature in talks with Japanese leaders.”  
Helen Clark will also address the Foreign Correspondents Club, meet New Zealand business people in Japan, and attend the signing of a new arrangement to strengthen co-operation in science and technology between New Zealand and Japan.

Helen Clark last visited China and Japan in 2001.