---
title: "Budget 2005:Biz portal to lift business performance"
date: 2005-05-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23047
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

The Labour Progressive government is investing $9.9 million over four years to develop the [existing biz.org.nz site](http://www.biz.org.nz/public/home.aspx?sectionid=53) into a world class business portal.

It will be supported by telephone, email, fax and face to face advisory and mentoring services.

“We want the Biz portal to be the first place that businesses and their advisors go to access the services and information they need to become successful businesses,” Minister for Economic Development, Jim Anderton said.

“It’s important that businesses can access quality, trusted information quickly and efficiently. The portal will reduce the costs of searching on the internet and will provide easy access to sound, reliable information.

“By helping to reduce the amount of time businesses spend searching for information on the Internet, and providing help to improve business skills, the portal will play an important role in helping to lift New Zealand’s productivity.

“The new portal and search engine will also make finding out information about your obligations as a business owner and interacting with government, a lot easier.

“It is clear to me that innovative, well-managed, and world-class businesses need fast access to information and advice in order to be successful in this fast-moving, globalised world. This portal will be invaluable in providing it," Jim Anderton said.

This initiative is part of the government's Digital Strategy launched in Wellington by video conference today. It builds on the success of the biz.org.nz website.

Funding is made up of $6.0 million operating and $3.9 million capital funding from Vote Economic, Industry and Regional Development.