---
title: "Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) settlement legislation passed today"
date: 2005-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23082
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Defence
---

Treaty Negotiations Minister Mark Burton welcomed the passage by Parliament today of the Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) Claims Settlement Act. The Act provides for the transfer of settlement assets agreed in the 2003 Deed of Settlement, and finalises the iwi’s historical Treaty of Waitangi claims.

Representatives of Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) were in Parliament to witness the passage of the legislation. This is the second claims Act to be passed by Parliament dealing with the Bay of Plenty area following the passage of the Ngäti Awa Claims Settlement Act in March.

“Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) suffered confiscation of much of their land by the Crown in the 1860s," Mark Burton said.

“The Act acknowledges that the confiscations were unjust and a breach of the Treaty.

“The Act also acknowledges the strong sense of grievance felt by Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) over the loss of control of, and access to, the Kawerau geothermal system as a result of Crown actions.

“The settlement includes a Crown Apology for breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi and its principles, cultural redress including the transfer of five sites of significance to Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty), and a combination of cash and Crown-owned land worth $10.5 million," Mark Burton said.

Ngäti Tüwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) is based around the Kawerau and Matatä areas, with around 3000 members. Ngäti Tüwharetoa located in the Bay of Plenty are related to, but distinct from, Ngäti Tüwharetoa based in Taupo.