---
title: "Kyoto turns Nelson gas to cash"
date: 2005-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23182
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Climate Change Issues
---

This government's ratification of the Kyoto Protocol is set to result in more clean, green power flowing. Meridian Solutions' Nelson Landfill Gas Project has been awarded 28,000 internationally tradable emissions units under the government's Projects to Reduce Emissions programme. If sold at $15 each would be worth $420,000.

"This government is taking a responsible approach to climate change and managing our economy. The key to this is the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. Under it we are transforming our economy for growth in a world where greenhouse gas emissions are priced," says Convenor of the Ministerial Group on Climate Change, Pete Hodgson.

"The Programme would not exist if we were not in Kyoto. It alone is forecast to help us save over 11 million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions and has helped bring forward over 800 MW of power projects."

Meridian's proposed project comprises the construction and operation of a landfill gas treatment system at the York Valley landfill. The gas will then be piped to Nelson Hospital where it will be used to fuel a new boiler system for generating heat. It is estimated that the project could save the hospital around $48,000 per year while reducing its reliance on coal. The project is forecast to offset the emission of around 28,477 tonnes of carbon dioxide between 2008 and 2012; the first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.

"By tackling climate change in this way, this scheme is helping to protect the environment and the unique Kiwi lifestyle for future generations. At the same time, it will help meet the power needs of our growing regional economy in a sustainable way."

Under the Programme, units are awarded to projects that lead to a net reduction in emissions against business as usual that would otherwise not go ahead and that are successful in a tender round. To date, 10 million units, which are internationally tradable, have been out for tender.

The proposal is subject to normal planning processes.

www.climatechange.govt.nz