---
title: "Budget 2005: fair, responsible, inclusive"
date: 2005-05-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23087
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark says Budget 2005 is another important step in building strong foundations for sustainable growth, making social investments, and helping New Zealanders build a stake in their country.

"This is a budget that reinforces the themes that have been associated with the Labour-Progressive Government," Helen Clark said.

"For the past five and a half years the government has been building a prosperous economy which delivers a fairer, healthier, and well educated society, and a sustainable and better quality of life for all New Zealanders.

"In today’s budget we are continuing our work to make New Zealand an even more compelling and secure place in which to live, work, bring up children, invest, and take pride.

"We are progressing key investments in social services such as housing, health, and education, providing additional funding for the Defence Force, and a significant funding boost for the transport sector.

"It is an important budget for the future as we are outlining a package aimed at building the asset base and savings capacity of New Zealanders. This is what strong and responsible government is about.

"Tax changes in Michael Cullen’s sixth budget will help to facilitate savings, lower business costs, increase productivity, and grow the economy.

"Our policy programme is sustainable because it is grounded in sound fiscal policy. The fiscal out-turn published today confirms the government’s reputation as a responsible manager of the public purse. I am proud that careful fiscal management has become a hallmark of this government.

"In summary, Budget 2005 carries on the work of lifting economic performance, improving social outcomes, and equipping New Zealand to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century," Helen Clark said.