---
title: "Enhancing liquor licensing enforcement capability"
date: 2005-05-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23010
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Budget 2005

Budget 2005 includes an investment of $1.88 million (GST exclusive) over the next four financial years to enhance the Police Department's ability to enforce liquor licensing laws.

The initiative, secured by Jim Anderton's Progressive Party in the coalition government's sixth budget round, is one of a number of Budget 2005 programmes designed to strength the government's campaign to reduce the harm caused by alcohol and other drugs.

"Progressive's Budget 2005 initiatives include programmes to reduce the demand for drugs, such as through a further expansion of the nationwide Community Action on Drugs and Alcohol network. This initiative is related to bolstering work on targeting the supply of alcohol and other drugs," Mr Anderton said.

"Progressive wants to strengthen the Police Department's ability of help prevent alcohol-related violence and other offending. This initiative will provide for investment in additional liquor licensing officers, and beefed up administration support to these officers, in the areas of most need," the Progressive leader said.

"We believe the initiative will complement ALAC's culture change programme. Progressive knows there are no simple or quick fixes to improving our country's drinking culture. Many measures need to progress simultaneously to have the most positive effect and Progressive is promoting legislation to strengthen liquor advertising law and are also asking Parliament to consider the strong evidence in favour of raising the legal alcohol purchasing age back to twenty.