---
title: "Courthouse spending momentum builds"
date: 2005-05-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23016
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Courts
---

Building on last year's courthouse replacements and recent capital works, Courts Minister Rick Barker today announced a substantial budget capital allocation of $39 million for five more courthouse replacements or expansions.

"Ageing, cramped courthouses and an increase in multi defended jury trials, mean several of our courts are no longer practical or safe and are not running as well as I would like. This new budget money is part of a 10-year capital works programme to bring our courts back up to modern standards the public need.

" Many of our courts need substantial expansion and this year's budget investment along with the roll out of new digital audio recording technology, I am confident will deliver sustainable improvements to court efficiency and safety.

"Although there are many courts on the list for building works, this year the 100 year old Levin Court, and Invercargill gain funds for a new courthouse. The Budget also funds a land purchase to replace New Plymouth courthouse, a total capital spend of $17.5 million.

"Hastings Court will be overhauled and expanded and Manukau District Court will be expanded to allow for two new large multi-defendant courtrooms that will be available for both High Court and District Court trials, a total capital spend of $21.5 million.

Rick Barker says that because a quarter of New Zealand's courthouses are 100 years old and 50 per cent are over 50 years old, just adding on bits here and there is no longer a practical way to bring them up to modern day requirements. He says new buildings will include major security improvements such as a 'one-entry' security system with x-ray scanning equipment like what is used at airports.

"Safety in court is a key theme I am driving this year, going to court is a stressful time and it is important that staff, the judiciary, the public and witnesses are safe and have modern, comfortable facilities.

"There's been a number of security breaches at court recently and I am sure in the new security measures will greatly improve the Courts ability to manage security incidents, he said.

Today's announcement is part of a Budget theme of improving safety in court.