---
title: "Budget 2005:Opportunities for Sickness and Invalid's beneficiaries"
date: 2005-05-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23001
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

$27.7 million will be invested over the next four years to help more Sickness and Invalid's beneficiaries move into work, Social Development and Employment Minister Steve Maharey announced today.

The funding will allow for a major expansion of the new service for Sickness and Invalid's Benefit recipients that has already helped thousands of people move into work.

"We've already seen a 13 per cent increase in the number of people leaving Sickness and Invalid's Benefits since the Service pilots began," Steve Maharey said. "It's clear that many people on Sickness and Invalids Benefits want to work, but need support to manage their medical conditions while preparing for jobs."

"While we understand the reasons for growth in numbers on these benefits, we believe that with this strong investment in support and incentives we can reverse this trend," Steve Maharey said.

Growth in sickness and invalids benefit numbers has occurred in most OECD countries over the last three decades as a result of ageing populations, increased diagnosis of mental health conditions and community-based treatment of people with mental illnesses.

The funding will allow for:  
·Improved work assessments to prepare 2,500 people for a long-term return to work  
·Increased support for disabled job seekers and their employers  
·A 76 per cent increase in payments to designated doctors for GPs and psychologists and a 62 per cent increase for specialists (designated doctors are responsible for assessing an individual's eligibility for the Invalid's Benefit)  
·The nationwide roll-out of a second-opinion programme to help doctors better assess Sickness Benefit eligibility

Today's funding announcement is in addition to funds announced in January, bringing the total investment in the new service to $127.8 million over four years (see attached for details).

Steve Maharey made the announcement at the launch of Providing Access to Health Solutions (PATHS) in Tauranga. PATHS is a key part of the New Service and involves a partnership between Work and Income and District Health Boards.

PATHS programmes are now up and running in Manukau, Wellington and Western Bay of Plenty. Clients participating in PATHS receive a range of employment and health services to help overcome the barriers that prevent them from returning to work.

Steve Maharey took the opportunity to acknowledge United Future New Zealand who have urged that funding be made available to treat the incapacity of Sickness and Invalid's beneficiaries to hasten their return to work.

Fact Sheet:

New service for Sickness and Invalid's benefit recipients – New initiatives in Budget 2005

Preparing for work assessment

The preparing for work assessment identifies what a client is able to do and what supports might benefit the client in employment. This funding will enable 2,500 clients to be assessed each year.

Individual employment support (disability)

This initiative provides increased availability of support funds to assist more people with disabilities and their new employer to meet the specific needs a person may have in order to work, such as specialist equipment and workplace modifications. This funding will enable an additional 1000 clients to be helped in 2005/06 with an ongoing funding commitment in out-years for 1,500 clients.

Increased payments to designated doctors

This funding will allow fees to designated doctors to be increased. These fees were last reviewed in 1995. The new fees to designated GPs and psychologists will increase from $67.50 to $119.25 per visit and Specialist fees will increase from $103.84 to $168.75 (GST incl.) per visit.

Second opinions for doctors

In January a new programme was launched in Wellington enabling doctors to seek second opinions when determining an individual's eligibility for the Sickness Benefit. Budget 2005 will allow this programme to be rolled-out nationwide.

Employment coordination

An employment co-ordinator role will be established in each of the 11 Work and Income regions. Their principal task will be to develop and deliver an appropriate work brokerage service for clients with ill health or disability. This will involve putting in place processes to retain people's employment connections when they first come on to benefit. They will also develop close working relationships between Work and Income and local organisations that assist these clients into work, including community employment initiatives and contracted services such as supported employment.

Elements of the new service funded prior to Budget 2005:  
·Enhanced case management to slash manager case loads from 1 manager to 350 Sickness and Invalid's benefit clients to 1:225  
·Reducing case manager loads to 1:160 in 14 Jobs Jolt concept sites  
·Providing Access to Health Solutions (PATHS) in five regions  
·Disability work support funds including transportation and in-work visits  
·Employment services for people with long-term severe mental health conditions  
·Services for people with spinal impairment  
·Early intervention for clients under 25 experiencing their first episode of psychotic illness