---
title: "Maori looking to have a say in workforce development"
date: 2005-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23344
ministers:
  - Dover Samuels
portfolios:
  - State
---

Te Tai Tokerau MP Dover Samuels is urging Maori to have their say on a new plan aimed at building the Maori health and disability workforce over the next 10 to 15 years.

"We need a strong health and disability sector with enough skilled and experienced Maori workers to meet the needs of Maori and our whänau, now and in the future," Mr Samuels said.

"With the Raranga Tupuake: Maori Health Workforce Development Plan Discussion Document we all have a chance to think about how important this is, what we would like to see and how we can have input into an issue that affects every one of us.

"I strongly encourage people to look at the discussion document and make a submission in Paihia on the 10th of June."

Over the last year I have visited a number of Maori Health Providers in the Northland region with Associate Health Minister Mita Ririnui where we identified staffing and retention as issues to be addressed.

Raranga Tupuake focuses on increasing the number of Maori in the workforce at all levels, expanding the skill base of Maori currently in the workforce and enabling equitable access for Maori to future training opportunities.

Dover said it was crucial to address under-representation of Maori in almost all areas of the health workforce.

Maori represent about 15 percent of New Zealand's population but are estimated to make up only five percent of the health workforce, excluding informal support workers and alternative complementary health practitioners. Kaiawhina and community health workers are an important part of our workforce and Maori are well represented in these groups.

The discussion document is available www.moh.govt.nz/maori.html. All submissions on the Raranga Tupuake: Maori Health Workforce Development Plan Discussion Document are due by 5pm, Friday 8 July. The final workforce development plan will be released after consultation and analysis of submissions.