---
title: "Tony Couch appointment"
date: 2005-05-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23065
ministers:
  - Michael Cullen
portfolios:
  - Attorney-General
---

17 May 2005Media Statement  
Employment Court and District Court Judge AppointedAttorney-General Michael Cullen today announced the appointment of Tony Couch of Christchurch as a Judge of the Employment Court and of the District Court. Mr Couch will sit in Christchurch.Mr Couch graduated from Canterbury University with an LLB (Hons) in 1980. He initially practised in the firm of Weston Ward and Lascelles and subsequently as a sole practitioner. A barrister sole in Christchurch since 1992, his principal area of practice in recent years has been employment law, including a specialist appellate practice. He also has a longstanding interest in intellectual property and appears in civil proceedings and tribunal matters. He has tutored in torts and contract law and given guest lectures in employment law at Canterbury University. Before studying law, Mr Couch studied mathematics and served in Fiji with Volunteer Service Abroad. He also trained and worked as a tradesman. Mr Couch has served on numerous District Law Society committees and the NZ Law Society Employment Law Committee.Outside the law, Mr Couch has been involved for more than 30 years in amateur and semi-professional theatre. He also served for many years as an advisor to the US Antarctic programme.Contact: Patricia Herbert, press secretary, 471-9412 or 021-270-9013