---
title: "Packaging Accord helps keep glass recycling going"
date: 2005-05-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23208
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Environment Minister Marian Hobbs says she is delighted that key players in the glass packaging industry have reached an agreement to help keep glass recycling going.

The Packaging Accord Governing Board Chair, Tony Nowell, has announced that many of the brand owners and producers using glass packaging will pay a six month voluntary levy on imported glass. The levy will also contribute to funding work on a longer term solution. About 90 percent of brand owners and producers using glass packaging are accord members.

The detail of the glass levy will now be discussed with local government and recyclers.

"The glass sector has shown it is prepared to take more responsibility for the waste packaging its products create – and more industry responsibility for reducing this waste is an underlying principle of the Packaging Accord," Marian Hobbs said. "The voluntary levy is a positive step and shows the desire of industry to deliver on their accord commitments."

New Zealand currently recovers more glass than it can handle. ACI Glass, the country's main glass recycler, has dropped its prices for used glass because of market changes and an excess of clear glass that is more difficult for it to recycle.

Last year around 95,000 tonnes of used glass was collected, about half of the glass packaging used in this country. ACI can recycle about 70,000 tonnes in its production of new glass. The remainder is stockpiled or sent to Australia for processing.

"Communities are right behind glass recycling and it is an integral part of kerbside collections," Marian Hobbs said. "Over 95 per cent of the population has access to glass recycling and it's essential for our environment that recycling continues.

"I am very pleased that the levy will help sustain glass collections for the time being. There's still a need to increase markets for recycled glass, and the accord partners, including government, now face the challenge of working on a longer term solution.

"The government has made it clear from the outset that if the voluntary, industry-led approach of the Packaging Accord does not work then it would look at legislation."

The Packaging Accord is a voluntary industry agreement to reduce and reuse packaging. The accord includes targets to increase the amount of packaging recycled. It also covers paper, plastics, steel and aluminium.