---
title: "Prince William to visit"
date: 2005-05-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23055
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark has announced that Prince William will visit New Zealand in July.

While it is predominantly a private visit in conjunction with the British and Irish Lions rugby tour, Prince William will also undertake official engagements.

Helen Clark said she was pleased that New Zealand was to host Prince William soon after the successful March visit by his father, Prince Charles.

“Prince William is a popular and engaging young man and his visit will attract a lot of interest,” Helen Clark said.

“Planning for his visit was triggered by an invitation from the British and Irish Lions management for Prince William to join the tour during its concluding stages.

“It is proposed that he will visit the Lions at a training camp, and attend the second and third test matches on 2 July and 9 July respectively.

“Clarence House, the official London residence of Prince Charles, approached Government House in Wellington to discuss whether Prince William might also undertake official engagements while in New Zealand.

“I am pleased to announce that agreement has now been reached, and that Prince William will be welcomed as a guest of the New Zealand Government.

“Detailed plans are still being discussed, but it is proposed that he will represent the Queen at ceremonies in Wellington and Auckland to commemorate the end of the Second World War, and undertake a school visit and sightseeing activities.

“Prince William and his brother, Prince Harry, are both keen rugby fans. Prince Harry attended several of England’s 2003 Rugby World Cup games while on a three-month visit to Australia.

“In economic, sporting and entertainment terms, the Lions tour was already promising to be one of this country’s biggest and most memorable events. Prince William’s presence will add yet another dimension to it,” Helen Clark said.