---
title: "Long term unemployment beneficiaries down a third in a year"
date: 2005-05-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23237
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

A combination of targeted initiatives put in place by Work and Income and a strong economy, has led to a significant drop in the number of long term unemployed.

Associate Minister for Social Development and Employment Rick Barker released figures today showing that the number of people on an unemployment benefit for more than two years has dropped by nearly 40 per cent since March 2000 and by a third in one year.

"There are nearly 10,000 less long-term unemployed people being supported on the unemployment benefit than in March 2000," said Rick Barker.

"A long term unemployed person basically has a history of being on benefits and there is a myriad of reasons that have stymied their ability to get back into the workforce, so this result is really great in that context.

"The number of people receiving an income tested benefit has gone down 21 per cent overall in the last 6 years. There is now a lower proportion of working age New Zealanders on an income tested benefit than any time over the past decade, the government is determined to break the cycle of benefit dependency.

" A range of Work and Income initiatives have been successful in targeting the long term unemployed, these include Intensified case management, new industry partnerships, jobs jolt and job search seminars that are resulting in better personal skills identification and sustainable employment.

"The increase of one-on-one case management such as the rural Mobile Employment Service and the Urban Employment Service is reaching clients in their homes to get more people into jobs.

" Cabinet recently agreed to provide higher levels of subsidy to employers taking on clients who've been unemployed for a long time, this along with the employers who've already taken on long term unemployed is contributing to more people getting into the workforce," Rick Barker said.

A new integrated model for case managing approximately 1,700 clients in Wellington, Manukau and Northland who are likely to reach 3 years on a benefit has also started. This initiative includes outbound calling, frequent interviews with case managers and, depending on individual circumstances, may result in subsidised employment.