---
title: "Appointments to the council and arts boards of Creative New Zealand"
date: 2005-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23247
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

The Associate Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Judith Tizard today announced the following appointments to the Creative New Zealand Council and arts boards:

- Waaka Vercoe to the Council;
- Terry Snow to the Arts Board; and
- Marina Sciascia to the Te Waka Toi Board.

All three have been appointed for three-year terms from 1 June 2005 to 31 May 2008.

Ms Tizard expressed her confidence in the new appointments. “I am very pleased that Mr Vercoe, Mr Snow and Ms Sciascia have agreed to serve on the Creative New Zealand Council and boards. Their collective experience in artistic and cultural matters will bring valuable skills to the body they are joining, as will the knowledge of arts communities they participate in.

“I welcome their considerable commitment and contribution to the Crown’s creative arts bodies,” Judith Tizard said.

The purpose of [Creative New Zealand](http://www.creativenz.govt.nz) is to encourage, promote and supports the arts in New Zealand for the benefit of all New Zealanders. The Council is responsible for overall policy development and is the “public face” of the organization. It guides the development of Creative New Zealand’s three-year Strategic Plan, and determines the division of funding between the two arts boards.

The Arts Board of Creative New Zealand promotes and supports the arts of all New Zealanders by developing art-form policy, allocating grants and carrying out initiatives that support the strategic direction set by the Arts Council. Te Waka Toi is responsible for encouraging, promoting and supporting Maori arts in Aotearoa through the allocation of funding to Maori artists, arts organisations, and arts projects.

* * *

**Background information on appointees**

**Waaka Vercoe** (Ngati Awa, Te Arawa) is a kaumatua with skills in local government, having worked as Maori Policy Advisor for the Bay of Plenty Regional Council for many years. Mr Vercoe is fully bi-lingual and has published in Maori. He is currently a member of the Maori Heritage Council of the Historic Places Trust.

**Terry Snow** is an Auckland journalist who has participated in and covered the arts extensively over more than 30 years, in New Zealand, the UK and the Netherlands. His career has included time as theatre and music critic for the Auckland Star, Metro Magazine and The Listener. He also has commercial experience with book publishing and writes music for personal interest. Terry Snow is a member of the New Zealand Press Council and the Advertising Standards Complaints Board.

**Marina Sciascia** (Ngati Kahungunu) has skills in planning, management, kaitiaki principles, networking, facilitation, communication, negotiation and cultural awareness. She was appointed to the East Coast/Hawke's Bay Conservation Board in 2002. Marina is currently Acting Manager of the Te Herenga Marae at Victoria University of Wellington (2004/5).