---
title: "Hui Taumata Taskforce all set to go"
date: 2005-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23163
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

Minister of Mâori Affairs, Parekura Horomia today announced that $2.85 million would be made available in response to the Hui Taumata Summary Report released this morning during a post Budget Mâori business network meeting held in Wellington.  
The Hui Taumata Summary Report is a report on the Mâori Economic Development Summit held in Wellington in March of this year.  
Speaking at this morning's meeting Mr Horomia said, "the second Hui Taumata was a clear success. It celebrated the substantial work that's been done over the past twenty years to build an economically independent people, and I commend Sir Paul and the other members of the Steering Committee for the work they have done in bringing this together.  
"At this year's Hui Taumata it was made clear that the path for Mâori from dependency to development is through education, employment and enterprise; that Mâori would continue to steer their own economic development; and that the primary responsibility for successful Mâori development now lies with Mâori. We need to work with others rather than in isolation, to take up opportunities that are within our grasp. Partnerships, collaboration and networking are going to be critical to our development in the future.  
"I pledged my ongoing commitment as Minister of Mâori Affairs to working with our people to realise their ambitions, to ensure that Maori succeeding as Mâori through the realisation of Mâori potential, becomes a reality.  
"This government shares that commitment. We have a unity of purpose and we are all focused on the contribution that Mâori make to a strong and growing economy.  
"That's why government wants to see the work of this Steering Committee continue, and that's why it has agreed to provide funding to support the Hui Taumata Taskforce.  
"The Taskforce is about partnerships, collaboration and networking. It's also about bringing together the expertise and opportunities that people at the top of their fields, from a wide range of sectors can offer, to supporting the work of the Hui Taumata in realising Mâori potential.  
"I want to take this opportunity to thank Business New Zealand, the Council of Trade Unions and Maori leaders for the commitment they have pledged to the Hui Taumata Taskforce.