---
title: "One stop online access to cultural information"
date: 2005-05-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23051
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

Prime Minister and Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Helen Clark welcomed the announcement of $3.6 million to develop an internet portal for New Zealand's cultural sector.

Helen Clark said the cultural portal will offer a co-ordinated web presence for government cultural agencies, government funded cultural organisations, and other cultural entities.

"The portal will promote New Zealand's cultural goods, services, events, and activities to a wider, more diverse audience both nationally and internationally," Helen Clark said.

"The portal will help to meet the demand for web-based information to assist in planning, pre-booking, and paying for cultural tourism related activities.

"It will include research on New Zealand culture and cultural identity through access to the Dictionary of NZ Biography, NZHistory.net, and Te Ara: the online encyclopedia of New Zealand.

"There will be links to organisations including Te Papa, the NZSO, the Historic Places Trust, the Royal New Zealand Ballet, and Archives New Zealand. The portal will provide access to New Zealand broadcasters and links to local and regional cultural institutions such as art galleries and museums.

"The first stage of the project will be to build the infrastructure of a web portal, as a common access point to arts, culture and heritage information, including the ability to search across associated government agency websites.

"The second stage will set up a cultural events website within the portal, with a facility for online bookings. The final stage will offer access to cultural products, activities, and services," Helen Clark said.

The portal is included in the Digital Strategy for New Zealand announced this afternoon. The government will provide $3.6 million (GST exclusive) over four years as part of Budget 2005 to develop the cultural portal.

The Digital Strategy is available at [www.digitalstrategy.govt.nz](http://www.digitalstrategy.govt.nz/)