---
title: "Asian Gypsy Moth eradicated"
date: 2005-05-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23203
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Biosecurity
---

One of the world’s most destructive forestry pests – the Asian Gypsy Moth – has been eradicated from Hamilton, Biosecurity Minister Jim Sutton said today.

Mr Sutton said it has taken two years from the trapping of the final moth to declare a pest eradicated. The last – and only – Asian Gypsy Moth found in the Hamilton infestation was trapped on 26 March 2003.

“There has been no gypsy moth activity since aerial treatment was carried out in October/November 2003, which equates to two generations. International recommendations for gypsy moth are that where no further activity is detected for two generations after treatment, then eradication can be declared successful.”

Mr Sutton said the total cost of the eradication programme to date was around $5.4 million.

“In addition, the people of Hamilton had to endure considerable inconvienence and discomfort during the aerial spray and plant movement controls components of the eradication effort. Their cooperation was much appreciated.”

As well as aerial spraying, the eradication effort included ground searching, pheromone trapping in Hamilton and surrounding satellite towns, mass trapping, public awareness, and the establishment of a Controlled Area and movement controls on host vegetation.

Mr Sutton said the declaration of eradication meant that the controlled area notice would be revoked and all associated movement control activities would stop.

He said that the national gypsy moth surveillance programme would continue to monitor pheromone traps within Hamilton city, as happened in many parts of the country.