---
title: "Racing’s tax submission under consideration"
date: 2005-05-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23031
ministers:
  - Damien O'Connor
portfolios:
  - Racing
---

There will be no adjustment to racing’s gambling tax status in the forthcoming budget, Racing Minister Damien O'Connor said today. However, the Government has allocated money in the budget to support an official analysis of the industry’s tax submission.

Earlier this year, the New Zealand Racing Board presented a comprehensive and detailed submission to Government proposing a tax adjustment for racing. The submission was received too late for the detailed analysis required for a 2005 budget bid.

"I'm pleased the Board has invested in the submission," said Mr O’Connor. "But the Government needs to be satisfied that any change to racing's tax status would have a positive impact on both the industry and New Zealand. This work will be done in the next few months and I'm optimistic it will show racing has a good case."

Mr O'Connor acknowledged some people in the industry would be disappointed that there'd be no immediate change, but said it would be fiscally irresponsible for the Government to make the changes without a full analysis of the submission.

"It is important to recognise that the initial cost to taxpayers of the Board's proposal would be up to $35m per annum. The Government needs to be certain that this represents a good use of taxpayers' money."

He noted the Board was confident that the industry could generate an extra $25 million of revenue itself from various initiatives and increased efficiencies. He encouraged the Board to continue with this work.

"I would like to acknowledge the positive work undertaken by the Board since it was formed, and I'm delighted to hear that it's projecting a record pay-out from its operating revenue."

As is convention, the Government will not publicly release the Board’s submission while it is under consideration.