---
title: "Budget funds Wallaceville enhancement"
date: 2005-05-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23204
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Agriculture
---

The 2005 Budget provided funding for the establishment of a National Centre for Emerging Diseases and Biosecurity at Wallaceville, Upper Hutt, Biosecurity Minister Jim Sutton said today.

The new centre would add significantly to the country's capability to safeguard human and animal health and to protect the economy. It would comprise new state of the art Environmental Science and Research laboratories and new staff with existing Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry National Centre for Disease Investigation and AgriQuality facilities.

As part of the proposal, MAF will buy the land from AgResearch. The Budget allocated an extra $548,000 a year to MAF for this.

Mr Sutton said the proposal would enhance our national capabilities to provide animal health protection and biosecurity services. It would also enable an enhanced proactive, national response to human diseases such as meningococcal and influenza epidemics.

“Biosecurity is extremely important to New Zealand, and the Labour-Progressive Government takes its responsibilities in this area seriously."

Health Minister Annette King said the national centre provided a critical early warning facility for infectious diseases.

"This will provide the Health sector with the facilities to respond to and manage such threats as SARS and Bird Flu, which continue to be a danger to our population," she said.

"The benefit of locating human and animal health diagnostic capabilities together has been highlighted by recent world events such as the avian influenza outbreaks in Asia."

Ms King said the inter-agency approach, and the sharing of the world-class facilities, would enable maximum utilisation.

"Each agency will have the facility that they need available to them, and having the scientists working just along the corridor from each other will ensure optimum communication about diseases might potentially spread from animals to humans."

The establishment of the National Centre will be at a cost to health of $3.82 million for three years from 2006/07.