---
title: "NZ Customs to establish liaison position in Washington"
date: 2005-05-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23210
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Customs
---

Following talks in Washington with the United States Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Robert Bonner, NZ Customs Minister Rick Barker has confirmed that the New Zealand Customs Service will establish a liaison officer position in New Zealand's Embassy in Washington.

Rick Barker announced this new position (funded from Budget 2005) this morning during this week's visit to the United States.

"This new Customs position supports the Supply Chain Security Arrangement with the United States which began in December last year. It will also allow New Zealand to be better informed about trends, and border management issues identified by United States border and security agencies," he said.

" Because the US is New Zealand's second largest individual export destination and is also a driver of both regional and global trade and security activity, the Government has prioritised investment in strengthening its relationship with US customs.

" I am confident this increased direct agency to agency engagement will enhance NZ relations with the United States and consolidates our vital border security trade arrangement.

" A pilot position has confirmed the benefit of having an 'on the spot' Customs expert as a real conduit for increased interaction with the United States Customs and Border Security office.

Rick Barker says that many New Zealand businesses have significant interests in America and they will also benefit from this new position.

"The position enhances the general New Zealand Government presence in the United States and will increase interaction with large organisations such as the Department of Homeland Security," he said.

The New Zealand Customs Service expects to make an appointment to this position in the near future.