---
title: "Reducing demand for drugs in our communities"
date: 2005-05-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23011
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Budget 2005

The Progressive Party has continued to support efforts to reduce demand for drugs in communities and to improve access to treatment services for victims of addiction in this year’s budget round, the coalition government's sixth.

A further five Community Action on Youth and Drugs or CAYAD programmes are to be funded by $3.23 million (GST exclusive) over the next four financial years for at-risk communities where illicit drug use is highest, Mr Anderton said.

The locations for the five new CAYADs will be based on need, determined by analysis of Police Department statistics, school suspensions/stand down data, deprivation and youth employment statistics. They are likely be determined by July, with contracts in place by October of this year, the Progressive leader said.

"The CAYADs are there to try and reduce the demand for drugs in the community.

Mr Anderton said for those who have fallen victim to the drug peddlers, access to treatment is also vital.

"That is why our Budget 2005 initiatives also include measures to improve access to treatment in three simple but significant ways. An investment of $68,000 (GST exclusive) for a free alcohol and other drug service directory is being provided so that people don't have to pay to find out where to go for help.

"This directory will now list gambling addiction services as well as Alcohol and Other Drug services. The Budget also includes an investment of $60,000 (GST exclusive) to go toward an evaluation of an online alcohol and other drug treatment service trial. This service, if successful, could be a more user-friendly way for victims of drugs to gain immediate access to treatment. A further $50,000 has also been allocated for training in the use of an early intervention resource so victims of drugs can be better identified and helped.