---
title: "Government funding for Wearable Arts"
date: 2000-06-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10736
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The Minister of Tourism Mark Burton has presented a cheque for $150,000 to help fit out a permanent home for the New Zealand Wearable Art collection.

The presentation was made this afternoon in Nelson.

"New Zealand Wearable Art have staged an annual awards and show performance in Nelson since 1987 and the event has grown into an extravaganza of international significance," Mark Burton said.

"I am delighted that the Government is able to financially support the establishment of a Wearable Arts Centre in Nelson, which will be marketed as the ultimate arts experience.

"In a wonderful gesture, a private Nelson investor has provided a building that will allow for a display of the garments and provide a base for the staff of NZWA to work from.

"A lot of work still needs to be done to turn the building into a venue that reflects the creativity and uniqueness of Wearable Art. Today's grant from the Government will ensure that work can proceed in a timely fashion.

"The Wearable Arts Centre will be a cultural showcase that celebrates the talents and uniqueness of the people of New Zealand. Visitors to the gallery will be able to watch videos, see the garments being worn and watch specially choreographed performances.

"This project draws together the Government's commitment to appropriate support for the tourism industry and activities which celebrate our cultural heritage. The Government is proud to be in partnership with the local community to further develop this initiative," Mark Burton said.