---
title: "Minister Announces Green Ribbon Award Winners"
date: 2000-06-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10054
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

The Minister for the Environment, Marian Hobbs, has announced the winners of the five Green Ribbon Awards for the year 2000.

The Green Ribbon Awards carry no prize or financial recognition, but are a public acknowledgement of the work individuals, organisations and businesses have put into protecting and improving the environment.

The 2000 Green Ribbon Awards will be presented to:

\* Rural category: Di and Graham McBride of Te Kowhai, Waikato. They make the link between good business and good environmental management through the sustainable farming practices they apply on their farm. Their philosophy of total integrated management takes into account all factors – animal and human welfare, food safety and quality, and the protection of flora and fauna.

\* Business and industry category: Pukekohe Vegetable Growers Association for the Franklin Sustainablity Project. Their trials of sustainable farming practices have shown growers in the Franklin area how to reduce soil erosion and fertilizer use. The project brought together farmers, agribusiness, local councils and researchers in working to improve the environment.

\* Community and local government category: Amberley Residents Association, Hurunui District, North Canterbury. This voluntary organisation has grown out of a community initiative to reduce and recycle waste, and has survived considerable variation in the markets for recycled materials. The Association shares what it has learned with other groups throughout New Zealand and overseas.

\* Maori category: Liz Burge, of Carterton, for her activities as a Maori resource management spokesperson over the past 10 years. She was nominated by Wellington Regional Council for her work in coordinating comment on all matters relating to resource management on behalf of the Rangitaane o Wairarapa. She is a strong advocate for the importance of good communication between iwi and local government.

\* Environmental education category: Guides New Zealand for their “Save It” campaign. The campaign, which focuses guides on learning about and doing something positive for a specific plant or animal, is part of a long-term environmental education programme.

There were a total of 56 nominations for the awards this year.