---
title: "Government funding for Central Otago Rail Trail"
date: 2000-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10735
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The Minister of Tourism Mark Burton has handed over a cheque for $50,000 to the Otago Central Rail Trail Charitable Trust.

The presentation was made tonight at the Maldon Foyer in the Dunedin Centre.

"I am delighted that the Government has been able to show its support for the Otago Central Rail Trail through this special one-off grant," Mark Burton said.

The Otago Central Rail Trail is a 150km long trail from Middlemarch to Clyde that follows the line of the former Otago Central Railway. The land was acquired by the Department of Conservation in 1993 and is now managed as a public recreation reserve and is used by walkers, runners, cyclists and horse riders.

"Development of the Trail has been a successful cooperative effort between DOC and the Charitable Trust which was set up in 1994. There has been enthusiastic support from the many communities that lie along the line.

"The grant recognises the need to upgrade and maintain the Rail Trail, which enhances the experience of visitors to Central Otago and contributes to the local economy.

"This Government believes it has a responsibility to make appropriate investment in the tourism industry," Mark Burton said. "There is a synergy between developing tourism opportunities and the Government's commitment to regional development. Rejuvenation of many of our regions is likely to be closely linked with tourism growth.

"The Rail Trail is a unique recreational concept within New Zealand and it provides opportunities to the many small communities along its length for economic renewal and growth. The $50,000 one-off grant is an investment in that potential," Mark Burton said.