---
title: "Supporting businesses across New Zealand"
date: 2005-07-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23742
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Support, advice and training have been provided to over 12,300 businesses across New Zealand over the last year through the Enterprise Training Programme. Over 1000 companies have received grants. The Labour Progressive government celebrated these milestones today as part of its focus on small business this week.

Most of those assisted were small to medium sized enterprises (SMEs), which make up 96.3 per cent of all businesses in New Zealand, according to Minister for Small Business, Rick Barker and Minister for Economic, Industry and Regional Development, Jim Anderton.

"The Labour Progressive Government is focussed on supporting small to medium sized businesses to succeed, because they are a key driver in our economy and contribute to improving our level of innovation and creativity - qualities which lift value and stimulate economic growth.

"Every single region in the country has now been in positive growth mode, year on year, for 24 consecutive quarters. That's great news for the regions once left to decline under the 'hands-off' policies of the National party. This government's partnership approach to working with SMEs has clearly contributed to this consistent growth," Jim Anderton said.

"Kiwi businesses need access to quality, information, advice and services quickly and efficiently. New Zealand Trade and Enterprise provides this through offices across the country and the world.

"NZTE's work in supporting SMEs pays off in job creation. Of all new jobs created from 2000 to 2004, 60 per cent were from SMEs. Over the last year, 12,400 full-time equivalent jobs were created by SMEs, equating to a third of total employment growth. That's a great achievement and we are proud to work shoulder to shoulder with SMEs to create jobs for kiwi families," Rick Barker said.

12,372 businesses utilised the Enterprise Training Programme and 1078 received grants. Businesses can phone the Enterprise Hotline for more information on assistance available through NZTE: ph 0800 555 888, or visit www.nzte.govt.nz.

How can we help? A list of services provided by NZTE for SMEs

START UP ASSISTANCE:  
·General business advice - through the Biz programme  
·Grants for prototype development, feasibility studies or expert advice - Enterprise Development Grant programme  
·Business planning - Biz programme  
·Business mentoring - Biz programme  
·Research and Development - Enterprise training programme  
·Skill development and training - Enterprise training programme  
·Investment Raising - Escalator programme

BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT  
·Access to resources, knowledge and clustering - Incubator and clusters programmes  
·Developing business systems - Enterprise training programme  
·E-business advice - E-business guide programme  
·General business advice and information - Enterprise Hotline, Business in the Community and Company Rebuilders programmes  
·Grants for prototype development, feasibility studies or expert advice - Enterprise Development Grant programme  
·Growing customer base - Enterprise training programme  
·Business mentoring - Business in the community programme  
·Skill development and training - Enterprise training programme  
·Strategic planning - Enterprise training programme  
·Investment raising - Escalator programme

GOING GLOBAL  
·Access to resources, knowledge and clustering - Incubator and clusters programmes  
·Basic exporting information - Enterprise hotline, Enterprise training, MarketNewZealand.com  
·Developing an export plan - Enterprise hotline, Enterprise training, MarketNewZealand.com  
·Developing business systems - Enterprise training programme  
·E-business advice - E-business guide  
·General business advice and information - Enterprise hotline, Business in the community, Company Rebuilders programmes  
·Grants for market research, feasibility studies and expert advice - Enterprise Development Grant programme  
·Business mentoring - Business in the Community, Company Rebuilders programme  
·Regional initiatives - Regional Development Programme  
·Researching international markets - Enterprise Hotline, MarketNewZealand.com  
·Skill development and training - Enterprise training programme  
·Specialised international research - Enterprise Hotline, MarketNewZealand.com  
·Strategic planning - Enterprise Training Programme  
·Investment raising - Escalator programme