---
title: "Transition eased for nursing grads"
date: 2005-07-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23670
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

A new nationwide nursing programme, which will ease the transition of nursing graduates to clinical practice, will begin in District Health Boards next year.

"I am delighted to announce this new training opportunity for several hundred new nursing graduates entering the nursing workforce," says Health Minister Annette King. "The move from an academic environment to a busy hospital can be quite a challenge"

"The programme will see each new graduate teamed up with a designated senior nurse as mentor - who will have their workload reduced to accommodate this new role. At the same time the programme will offer some new graduates the chance to work in more than one service area. Overall we want to give new nurses the best possible opportunity to build a really solid foundation of nursing practice."

Ms King says a steering group, made up of the Ministry of Health, DHBNZ and the Nursing Council, will meet regularly until the programme is running in mid 2006. It will put in place the national framework, programme specification and standards in consultation with key nursing groups.

Funding of $800,000 has been set aside for start up costs, and ongoing funding will depend on how many graduates are offered the programme. The Ministry of Health's Clinical Training Agency (CTA) will pay $6000 per graduate as a contribution to the DHBs costs of offering the programme. It is estimated the programme will cost $12,000 per graduate, although each DHBs costs may vary. The Steering Group will oversee funding and contractual arrangements with the DHBs.

Ms King says DHBs will determine how many places to offer to meet their workforce needs, and will also discuss ways of enabling new graduates employed in primary health care, NGOs and aged care to have access to the programme.

Contact: John Saunders 04 470 6851