---
title: "Stats NZ Making Business Easier"
date: 2005-07-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23747
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Small Business
---

Just over $1 million is to go on new technology and software designed to reduce compliance costs for those businesses that supply data to Statistics New Zealand.

Statistics New Zealand will also spend $1.6 million on the introduction of a new web-based service to provide information against which businesses can benchmark their performance. The service will be developed in consultation with Business New Zealand, the Small Business Advisory Group, the Icehouse Business Incubator, the Institute of Chartered Accountants, BizInfo and the New Zealand Hotel Council. The package was announced by Statistics Minister Pete Hogdson and Minister for Small Business Rick Barker.

The balance will go on a pilot programme to standardise data collection.

"Kiwi businesses contribute a great deal to Statistics New Zealand and its good to see services for business being further improved," Pete Hodgson said.

"Being able to benchmark your performance against industry norms is a valuable business planning asset for many small and medium sized enterprises. This new web-based service should make that easier for business,” Rick Barker said.

Statistics New Zealand is also planning to extend the amount of social, economic and trade information it makes available free of charge.

The announcement of the Statistics NZ package follows Friday’s launch of a new Ministry of Economic Development website www.businessconsultation.govt.nz designed to make government consultation with businesses a smoother, and more efficient process.