---
title: "Isolated schools being connected by FarNet project"
date: 2005-07-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23620
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

A project designed to overcome barriers rural Northland school's face because of their geographic isolation is to receive extra funding of over $300,000, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced today.

"The FarNet project involves nine rural Northland schools and aims to improve their telecommunications and videoconferencing facilities,” Trevor Mallard said during a visit to Whangarei.

Established in 2001, the FarNet project is one of the Digital Opportunities Projects set up as a partnership between government and leading information and communications technologies (ICT) companies to bridge the digital divide.

The FarNet project will receive the money from the Ministry of Education’s Collaborative Innovations Fund. Each year this fund provides $1 million to support clusters of schools working together to develop new styles of teaching and learning to improve educational achievement of their students.

"The FarNet website already links teachers and students through the shared bi-lingual and bi-cultural resources and has developed a climate of collaboration between the schools," said Trevor Mallard.

"The nine schools in the FarNet project will receive $304,000 in total over three years to establish their video conferencing facilities, develop video conferencing teaching skills, and enhance community partnerships.

The schools involved in the FarNet project are: Bay of Islands College, Broadwood Area School, Kaitaia College, Northland College, Opononi Area School, Taipa Area School, Te Kura Taumata O Panguru, Whangaroa College, Te Hapua School and Te Kura Kaupapa Mâori O Taumarere.

"The Collaborative Innovations Fund's support to projects such as FarNet helps schools build an education system that equips New Zealanders with 21st Century skills and breaks down traditional learning barriers," Trevor Mallard said.