---
title: "Government and Auckland City Council to work together on housing"
date: 2005-07-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23800
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Housing
---

Housing New Zealand and Auckland City Council will work together to ensure developments in Glen Innes, and across Auckland, are in line with the best interests of the community, Housing Minister Steve Maharey said today.

Steve Maharey met with Deputy Mayor Dr Bruce Hucker in Glen Innes this morning.

"The government and Auckland City Council share the same concerns and goals for Glen Innes and communities throughout Auckland," Steve Maharey said. "We are determined that Glen Innes and other developments in the City have a good mix of private and public housing.

"The City Council today proposed it would work across the city to try and ensure that land is available for HNZC developments, so that we don't have concentrations of state housing. The government welcomes this as a positive step forward.

"Housing New Zealand assured Auckland City Council that it wants high-quality affordable housing and is committed to ensuring that its tenants will be part of a well balanced community."

Steve Maharey also welcomed news that Auckland City Council was willing to invest again in affordable housing. Auckland City Council and HNZC officials are now working together on how they can build more houses in the Auckland area.

"I welcome the City Council's commitment to investing in affordable housing. I'm confident that this commitment will strengthen the partnership between the Council and HNZC."

Deputy Mayor Dr Bruce Hucker welcomed HNZC's active approach to community development.

"HNZC does more than house people. They work with their tenants and with other agencies to help people get jobs, help children get involved in the community and generally ensure positive outcomes for their tenants. That's why I am confident the City Council will be able to work well with HNZC in a number of exciting developments across the city."