---
title: "Ngati Apa ki Rangitikei begins negotiations"
date: 2005-07-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23801
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations
---

The Crown and Ngati Apa ki Rangitikei have agreed to enter into negotiations settling the tribe’s historical Treaty of Waitangi claims, Treaty Negotiations Minister Hon Mark Burton said today.

Mark Burton, on behalf of the Crown, and Te Runanga o Ngati Apa signed Terms of Negotiation at Parliament this afternoon.

Terms of Negotiation set out how the parties will negotiate a durable settlement of all Ngati Apa ki Rangitikei’s historical Treaty claims.

Any Ngati Apa claims that relate to the South Island would not be included in these negotiations. They would be addressed through separate negotiations with the Kurahaupo confederation, Mark Burton said.

Ngati Apa’s traditional tribal area is centred in the Rangitikei and Manawatu district. The Crown recognised Te Runanga o Ngati Apa’s deed of mandate to represent the iwi in Treaty negotiations in November 2004.

The claims of Ngati Apa ki Rangitikei relate primarily to Crown purchases, the operation and impact of Native Land Laws, and the virtual landlessness that resulted.

The Crown recognised that its acts and omissions have contributed to the virtual landlessness suffered by Ngati Apa ki Rangitikei today, and that this was a breach of the Treaty of Waitangi and its principles, Mark Burton said.

On this basis he had signed Terms of Negotiation, he said.

“We can now address the grievances of the past and focus on building a stronger future together. I look forward to working with the Te Runanga o Ngati Apa to comprehensively resolve the historical grievances of the iwi," Mark Burton said.