---
title: "Companies Office and IRD, Making Life Easier"
date: 2005-07-25
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23772
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Small Business
---

“This new service will reduce the need to deal with two separate government agencies at the start-up phase of a company,” said Rick Barker.

“Having more collaboration between government agencies is something businesses have called for and the Small Business Advisory Group’s report last year said practical tools are needed to help simplify processes for small businesses in particular.

“This initiative is one of the ways we are looking at addressing the issues identified by the Group.”

Minister Barker said “this is a positive first step toward streamlining business start up processes and is a further move towards integrating government agencies’ services.

“We are committed to making it easier to do business. This is an example of that commitment in action,” said David Cunliffe.

The service will be optional but if no application for an IRD number is made during the online company incorporation, companies must then apply directly to Inland Revenue using the existing services, when a number is required at a later date.

The service is available on the Companies Office website www.companies.govt.nz

The information entered by the business on the Companies Office website is transferred to Inland Revenue via a secure web service.

The service will allow businesses to:

·Obtain a company IRD tax number.

·Set up a nominated person to act on behalf of the company with Inland Revenue

It will also allow registered tax agents to link the company to their agency.

Both departments will need to be notified of any later relevant changes to information, as no information will be shared beyond the incorporation process.

The service is available to New Zealand companies incorporated online.

For companies related queries, call 0508 Companies (0508 266 726) or visit www.companies.govt.nz.

For Inland Revenue queries, call 0800 377 774 or visit www.ird.govt.nz.