---
title: "New Zealand researchers building links with Asia"
date: 2005-07-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23799
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Research, Science and Technology
---

New Zealand's strength in agricultural and horticultural research provide major opportunities to develop new products for emerging markets such as China, Research, Science and Technology Minister Steve Maharey said today.

Steve Maharey told an audience at the Mt Albert Bioactives Research Centre – which included China’s Consul-General in Auckland and representatives of the Chinese and Korean business communities – that New Zealand's research strengths are well aligned with the needs of the Asian market.

"Asia is an increasingly important market for New Zealand value-added produce," Steve Maharey said. "New Zealand researchers have an opportunity to take advantage of our reputation for excellence in biotechnology and horticultural research to achieve commercial success in this emerging market."

The Mt Albert Bioactives Research Centre is a partnership between Crop & Food Research and the Mt Albert Health Research Laboratory and key staff include scientists from China. The centre works to enhance the abilities of New Zealand industries to produce healthy, value-added food products.

“The Bioactives Research Centre is an example of local research institutions working together to provide scientific services and develop innovative products. The fact that key staff have strong networks into Asia also makes this Centre an example of co-operation across national boundaries."

Steve Maharey said New Zealand's research relationship with China was particularly strong.

"Many of China’s research priorities align well with New Zealand’s expert capabilities. Last year’s visit to New Zealand by China’s Science Vice-Minister, Mr Li Xueyong did much to foster greater science collaboration and dialogue.