---
title: "Field investigations into TimberSaver boron"
date: 2005-07-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23686
ministers:
  - Chris Carter
portfolios:
  - Building Issues
---

Construction sites are to be inspected to establish whether the timber product, TimberSaver boron, has been properly used by builders or is failing in practice, Building Issues Minister Chris Carter said today.

"Because of the claims and counter-claims made about TimberSaver boron, I have asked the Department of Building and Housing to commission field research as part of a three-pronged inquiry into the product," Mr Carter said.

"Field investigations will establish whether there is any evidence the product is failing when actually used in construction. If evidence is found, I want the investigations to identify actual or potential causes of that failure.

"Depending on the results of the field research, it may be necessary to undertake further testing of the product with respect to its durability. We will assess the need for that once we have further information," Mr Carter said.

"As an additional precaution, I have also asked that a review is commissioned of the process used by the old Building Industry Authority to appraise TimberSaver boron. This will enable us to establish whether there is any inherent weakness in the appraisal process used.

"I must stress again we do not know if there is a problem with TimberSaver or how it has been used. The weight of evidence is against there being a problem, but it is my view these investigations are necessary to reassure homeowners and the building industry."

Mr Carter said he was expecting an interim report on the matter by July 30.