---
title: "New programme to intervene in family violence cases"
date: 2005-07-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23685
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Social Development and Employment Minister Steve Maharey said.

"Family violence is one of the most pressing issues we face as a country," Steve Maharey said.

"Every year, 12 women and 10 children die in New Zealand as a direct result of family violence – this cannot be tolerated in our society.

"We need immediate, concrete actions to address this serious issue. The programme I'm launching today is a further step in our work to support victims of family violence."

The $18.9 million programme will see Work and Income case managers trained to better identify and support families affected by violence.

Case managers will develop an income support plan for victims of family violence. In addition, referral processes will be streamlined to make sure clients can more easily access community-based violence prevention services. Work and Income will not record any information or make referrals without the consent of their clients.

The programme will be launched in Auckland, Canterbury and the East Coast this year. By 2007, it will be in operation in every region in the country.

Since the 2002 publication of [Te Rito – New Zealand's family violence prevention strategy](http://www.msd.govt.nz/publications/te-rito/) – the government has made significant progress in addressing the issue of family violence. A number of initiatives have been implemented, including:

- $12 million service for children who witness family violence
- New Zealand Family Violence Clearinghouse website
- Establishing Family and Community Services within the Ministry of Social Development, providing leadership and co-ordination of government and community services to families
- $3 million elder abuse and neglect prevention programme
- Family Violence Funding Circuit Breaker to streamline funding and auditing processes for service providers

Steve Maharey said initiatives like the Family Violence Intervention programme would remain significant aspects of the effort to eliminate family violence, but deeper cultural change was needed to truly make a difference.

"Cultural change to end family violence will require strong community leadership. This initiative has been developed with guidance from a number of community-based agencies."