---
title: "Telcos and government to tackle cell phones in prisons"
date: 2005-07-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23592
ministers:
  - Paul Swain
portfolios:
  - Corrections
---

Telecom and Vodafone have agreed to work with the government to stamp out cell phone use in New Zealand prisons, Corrections Minister Paul Swain said today.

"Inmates getting access to and using cell phones is a growing problem world-wide and the issue was high on the agenda at the Australasian Corrections Ministers' conference I attended recently.

"Cell phones can be used by inmates to intimidate witnesses and staff, and organise crime.

"Following the conference, I wrote to Telecom and Vodafone inviting them to work with the Department of Corrections on the issue. The responses have been encouraging and the department and the companies met last week."

The department and the companies have agreed to establish a working party to identify and implement possible solutions.

Mr Swain today released a report from the conference that looked at the technology for stopping cell phone use in prisons in Canada, Singapore, France, Israel and Britain.

Mr Swain said the report made it clear it is likely that a combination of measures will be required to supplement the hand-held detectors, which are already in use, and security measures already in place at prisons.

"Most importantly, any package that is devised must be developed in cooperation with the telecommunication carriers. I am pleased we have this agreement with Telecom and Vodafone to work together."

"Discussions were held with Telecom and Vodafone two years ago to trial jamming technology but there were concerns that legitimate cell phone users outside prison walls would also be disrupted.

"I understood the concerns. However, the report identifies new technologies that detect cell phones, monitor their use and interfere with calls over a smaller area than previously available. These options can now be looked at."  
In addition, Budget 2005 allocated an extra $4.1 million over the next four years to the Department of Corrections' crime prevention programme.

The funding adds to existing crime prevention and security measures by providing the technology and staff needed to monitor inmate landline telephone calls.

“Most importantly, this funding will provide for more staff in prisons and regional offices to collect, analyse and act on the "intelligence" obtained through the monitoring,” Mr Swain said.

Monitoring landline calls will help to minimise the risk of inmates using landline telephones to organise illegal activities. It also increases inmate, staff and visitor safety by detecting security risks earlier.

The telephone monitoring and analysis will build on existing security measures in prisons, said Mr Swain.

“There has also been a significant increase in the amount of contraband confiscated at vehicle checkpoints, including drugs, weapons and cell phones.”

Drug detection dog teams increased from six to 10 last year. The Department of Corrections is also continuing to improve prison security and crime prevention through improved perimeter fencing, more vehicle checkpoints and metal detectors.

Enhanced search provisions (rub-down searches and searches by scanner), provided for in the Corrections Act 2004, will further bolster existing security measures. The Act came into force in June.