---
title: "Pacific unemployment in Auckland halved in 2 years"
date: 2005-07-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23798
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

The government's Pacific Wave strategy has achieved its goal of halving Pacific unemployment in Auckland in just two years.

The result is a stunning achievement for the Pacific community Social Development and Employment Minister Steve Maharey and Associate Social Development Minister Taito Phillip Field said today.

"This government's active approach to tackling unemployment is working, and the Pacific community is no exception," says Steve Maharey. "By the end of June there were 2,622 Pacific people on unemployment benefits - a drop of 52.6 percent over the last two years.

"We've been successful because we've provided real solutions that help people move into jobs and stay in jobs – solutions like training, case management and partnerships with industries and communities.

"The OECD recently confirmed that it is active policies like Pacific Wave, not just a strong economy, that led to New Zealand to achieving the lowest unemployment rate in the developed world."

The Pacific Wave Strategy was introduced in July 2003 when there were 5,532 Pacific people in the region receiving Unemployment Benefit. The strategy aimed to reduce this by 50 percent by the end of June this year but achieved its goal in April – two months ahead of target.

A specialist Unit was established to implement the Pacific Wave Strategy. It is based in Otara and comprises a manager and nine case managers/work brokers.

Taito Phillip Field says close collaboration with the Pacific community has been critical to the strategy’s success.

"By working in partnership with the Pacific community we have been able to increase the community’s awareness of how Work and Income can help people find a job and support them to stay in work."