---
title: "Technology partnership programme to be piloted"
date: 2005-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23762
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

A Technology Partnership Programme developed by the Danish Technological Institute is to be piloted in New Zealand, Economic Minister Jim Anderton and Research, Science and Technology Minister Steve Maharey announced today.

The programme is a technology brokerage service that helps companies tap in to a global network of 20,000 experts working across a diverse range of research and development fields.

"The experts provide advice in response to specific product or process development issues. The service ensures firms receive a quick response from knowledge institutions to their queries (generally ten days). They can then choose which (if any) of the suggested solutions they will pursue," Jim Anderton said.

"As 98.8 per cent of global knowledge is created outside of New Zealand, it is essential for businesses to link into international knowledge networks, in order to compete in world markets.

"New Zealand knowledge institutions such as Crown Research Institutes and universities can also become part of this network, providing them with opportunities to partner domestic and international businesses," Steve Maharey said.

The Danish Technological Institute is an independent, not-for-profit institution established in 1906 to provide technological services to Danish businesses and the community at large. The Danish Technological Institute established the Technology Partnership Programme in Denmark in 1995 and has since introduced it in four other countries.

The Ministry of Economic Development contracted with the Danish Technological Institute to conduct a feasibility study of the Programme in New Zealand. The promising results from the feasibility study prompted the decision to proceed to a pilot.

After an open tender process, the Foundation for Research, Science and Technology was chosen as the New Zealand host for the Programme. The Foundation for Research, Science and Technology will recruit and house the Technology Partnership Programme project manager and consultants.

The pilot will run for 4-6 months. Preparations have already begun, with the main work expected to begin in August. The fee structure for the Programme will be established during the pilot.

At the pilot’s conclusion, a decision will be made whether to fully implement the Technology Partnership Programme.