---
title: "Unsafe goods notices revoked"
date: 2005-07-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23566
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Consumer Affairs
---

Three ‘Unsafe Goods Notices’ for Glitter Bangles, Disappearing Ink and Fade-Away Ink, and Toy Pistol Liquids have been revoked by Consumer Affairs Minister Judith Tizard.

“The reason these three Unsafe Goods Notices have been revoked is that they pre-dated the introduction of the Consumer Guarantees Act. This Act places a general obligation on suppliers to provide products which are of acceptable quality and safe,” said Judith Tizard.

Under the Consumer Guarantees Act, if there is a problem with a product a consumer has purchased, they have the right to seek their own redress from either the retailer or manufacturer who supplied the goods.

The Act states that goods must be safe, they must be of acceptable quality, must be fit for any particular purpose, and match the description or sample.

Where a problem is a serious one, the consumer can choose to either:

- return (reject) the goods and get their money back, or
- return the goods for a replacement of similar value and type (if the goods are reasonably available as part of the supplier's stock), or
- keep the goods and have the price reduced to make up for its drop in value.

“If a consumer is unable to resolve a problem with a trader or manufacturer they could take a claim to the Disputes Tribunal,” Judith Tizard said.

The Consumer Guarantees Act came into effect on 1 April 1994 and has been in force for over 11 years.

**Note**  
The ‘Unsafe Goods Notices’ for Glitter Bangles, Disappearing Ink and Fade-Away Ink, and Toy Pistol Liquids were revoked on 30 June 2005 and have been published in the New Zealand Gazette issued on 30 June 2005.