---
title: "Hon Taito Phillip Field to represent NZ at Solomons anniversary"
date: 2005-07-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23830
ministers:
  - Taito Phillip Field
portfolios:
  - Pacific Island Affairs
---

Associate Minister for Pacific Island Affairs Taito Phillip Field will represent the New Zealand Government at the second anniversary of the Regional Assistance Mission in Solomon Islands (RAMSI) in Honiara this weekend.

“The anniversary’s theme is “Iumi tugeta save duim” (we can do it together) – and that’s exactly what the partnership over the past two years has been all about, “ Mr Field said.

Police Commissioner Rob Robinson is also attending the anniversary.

“RAMSI came into effect two years ago following a number of attempts at peace by the Solomon Islands government and then its 2003 request for regional intervention to dissipate the tension that had been ongoing in Solomon Islands since the late 1990s.

“Based on the Biketawa Declaration that envisaged regional responses to situations like that facing the Solomon Islands was endorsed by the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Solomon Islands Parliament gave RAMSI unanimous support, “ Mr Field said.

“RAMSI’s initial phase was to restore law and order, and was police-led.

“It is great to see that as the security situation settles RAMSI can now move into its second phase and focus on governance reform, public sector services and improvement in economic opportunities across Solomon Islands.

“New Zealand’s relationship with Solomon Islands has developed over many years of close association, not least during the Guadalcanal-Solomon Islands campaign during World War II.

“We remain committed to the long term development of a safe and prosperous Solomon Islands. In addition to the personnel we have working directly with RAMSI, the New Zealand Government’s Solomon Islands aid programme is one of our largest.  
“Overall, the commitment by international donors, including New Zealand, to Solomon Islands has had visible effects and is appreciated there.

“As the situation in Solomon Islands begins to show signs of real improvement, an ongoing commitment from New Zealand is important to maintaining security and social and economic stability there,” Mr Field said.

Celebrations include a free concert and interfaith candlelight service. Mr Field will also have bilateral conversations with some of his political counterparts there.

Contact: Malo Ah-You, Senior Private Secretary , 04 471 9044