---
title: "Gifted and talented students benefit from school collaboration"
date: 2005-07-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23730
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

An innovative programme that targets gifted and talented students and enhances the collaboration between three Whangarei primary schools is to receive government funding, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced today.

The Gifted and Talented Education (GATE) project will enhance collaboration between three Bream Bay primary schools as they develop and implement a programme for their gifted and talented students.

The project will receive $29,788 over three years to develop the teaching and learning model across the Whangarei primary schools. The funding includes the coordination of the programme, professional development for teachers and workshops for students.

“The project focuses on improving learning achievement across the curriculum for all students and in particular for identified gifted and talented students,” Trevor Mallard said.

The funding is part of the Ministry of Education’s Collaborative Innovations Fund, which provides $1 million each year to encourage collaborative projects between schools that enhance student learning.

The schools in the project are One Tree Point School, Ruakaka School and Waipu School, all situated in Bream Bay, Whangarei. These schools have a strong focus on the gifted and talented and will also be committing their own funding over the three years to develop the programme.

"It provides an opportunity to strengthen and develop the existing support and co-operation between the three schools,” Trevor Mallard said.

“With the resources of the Collaborative Innovations Fund supporting projects such as this, we are developing an education system that meets the needs of a diverse range of students and focuses on raising achievement for all.