---
title: "Crown agrees to Kawerau geothermal assets deal"
date: 2005-07-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23671
ministers:
  - Michael Cullen
portfolios:
  - Finance
---

13 July 2005Media Statement  
Crown agrees deal on Kawerau geothermal assets

The Crown has agreed to transfer its Kawerau geothermal assets to State-Owned Enterprise Mighty River Power, Finance Minister Michael Cullen announced today.

“This is the first step in unlocking the potential of the Kawerau geothermal field which, if Mighty River Power proceeds with a proposal to build a geothermal power station at Kawerau, could generate up to 80MW of new energy every year.

“Continuing growth in electricity demand requires us to find approximately 150MW of new generation capacity each year. This is the equivalent of having to supply a city the size of Hamilton or Dunedin. New Zealand’s geothermal energy resource is relatively untapped, and can help us meet this critical need. Diversifying the way we generate our electricity also contributes towards greater security of supply,” said Dr Cullen.

Under the agreement, Mighty River Power will pay $14 million to the Crown, representing the commercial value of the assets as determined by an independent valuation by PriceWaterhouseCoopers.

In return, all of the Crown’s Kawerau assets, including commercial contracts, physical assets, resource consents and intellectual property connected with the Kawerau field will transfer to Mighty River Power. All liabilities associated with the field will also transfer to Mighty River Power.

Mighty River Power will then on-sell the majority of these assets to Ngati Tuwharetoa Geothermal Assets Limited in a commercial deal. Ngati Tuwharetoa Geothermal Assets Limited, Norske Skog Tasman and Mighty River Power will also agree to a Steamfield Management Plan which will detail how the steam from the Kawerau field will be used.

“Mighty River Power is well-placed to develop the considerable potential of the Kawerau field in conjunction with the other interested parties, and this agreement allows that to happen,” said Dr Cullen.

Attached: Backgrounder.

Contact: Patricia Herbert \[press secretary] 04-471-9412 or 021-270-9013. E-mail patricia.herbert@parliament.govt.nz

Kawerau geothermal asset sale: Background

The Crown has signed a final agreement to transfer its Kawerau geothermal assets to state-owned enterprise Mighty River Power.

Mighty River Power will pay the Crown $14 million for the Kawerau geothermal assets. The sale price was determined following an independent valuation of the assets conducted by PriceWaterhouseCoopers.

The sale covers physical assets (47 wells), commercial contracts, a very small parcel of land surrounding one well, resource consents and intellectual property associated with the Kawerau geothermal field, as well as the transfer of all associated liabilities and obligations.

The sale of these assets to Mighty River Power is the first step in unlocking the energy development potential of the Kawerau geothermal field. Had the assets remained under Crown ownership, it is unlikely they would have been developed. Mighty River Power has considerable expertise and experience in geothermal power through its existing investment and operations at Rotokawa and Mokai and is well placed to undertake the commercial development of the Kawerau geothermal field. Mighty River Power’s investments at Rotokawa and Mokai are in partnership with Maori land trusts.

The majority of the Kawerau geothermal assets Mighty River Power has purchased from the Crown will be on-sold to Ngati Tuwharetoa Geothermal Assets Ltd. The on-selling of the assets to Ngati Tuwharetoa Geothermal Assets Ltd is a commercial decision of Mighty River Power. While Ngati Tuwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) will ultimately be the owner of the existing assets, Mighty River Power will manage the development and running of the electricity generation operation.

The geothermal resource will continue to be managed by the Crown on behalf of all New Zealanders. Geothermal resources are managed in a similar way to water resources under the Resource Management Act.

Mighty River Power has begun preparation of information prior to commencing public consultation on its application for resource consent to build a geothermal power station with an estimated capacity of up to 80 megawatts – a similar capacity to the Mokai geothermal power station. The generation of electricity from the Kawerau geothermal field would contribute towards meeting New Zealand’s growing demand for energy and assist in providing greater security of supply.

Ultimately the Crown intends to sell all of its geothermal assets, as announced in April 2003. Following the sale of the Kawerau geothermal assets to Mighty River Power the Crown will retain ownership of around 60 residual wells (of which the majority are located in various fields throughout the central North Island and 5 are located in Northland). Included in the sale and purchase agreement between the Crown and Mighty River Power is the option for Mighty River Power to purchase the residual wells. This would allow the full potential of the remaining assets to be explored. However, the Crown does not intend to transfer the remaining wells until any Treaty claims in the areas in which the assets are located have been settled.