---
title: "eTime entrepreneurs enter the 'Jim Anderton Challenge'"
date: 2005-07-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23818
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Primary and intermediate school children have dubbed their final and biggest task of the year the 'Jim Anderton Challenge' in recognition of his promotion of entrepreneurship around the country. Jim Anderton launched the challenge this afternoon in Christchurch.

The eTime entrepreneurs course gives children practical training in entrepreneurship, business skills, media and marketing.

"These children are truly exceptional. In just 3 weeks 36 of them raised $32,000 through their business projects. That's something most adults couldn't achieve. I look forward to watching their progress as they compete in this, their final challenge for the year.

"The eTime entrepreneurs organisers should be congratulated on lifting the bar in their promotion of business as an inspirational option for young people as they think about their future careers. These children are getting the latest technology and training, and it is clearly a worthwhile investment.

"Business flair and skill are qualities that we all will benefit from in the future as these children contribute to a strong and growing economy, capable of lifting living standards for all New Zealanders," Jim Anderton said.

Funds raised in this course are reinvested for future entrepreneurial education.

In July 2004 NZTE approved $118,710 funding for this course under the Enterprise Culture and Skills Activity Fund (ECSA). So far, the course has drawn down $94,968 of that funding.

**Editors note**

The ECSA Fund is a contestable fund that supports projects that aim to develop enterprising skills and attitudes among New Zealanders. Projects involve employers, employees, young people, the community and the education sector. The focus is on seed funding and piloting new and innovative projects.

The fund has $1.7 million (incl GST) per year available for projects.

Activities funded are required to contribute to one or more of the following objectives:

a.A climate that recognises and reinforces business success amongst existing and potential businesses,

b.A social culture that positively supports entrepreneurial activity and business success,

c.A culture in education where business is seen as a positive contributor to society and a worthwhile career aspiration for students.