---
title: "Good progress on taskforce recommendations"
date: 2005-07-25
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23777
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

More than sixty initiatives to grow the economy, ranging from changes in the tax system to encouraging more students to study science and technology, are underway as a result of four Growth and Innovation Framework sector taskforces.

A report outlining progress on implementing the recommendations from the four sector taskforces: Biotechnology, Information and Communications Technology (ICT), Design and Screen Production, was released today by Jim Anderton, Minister for Economic, Industry and Regional Development.

"Engaging with key enabling sectors in the economy is essential if we are to lift our level of economic growth and raising living standards for all New Zealanders. These four sectors were identified for special attention because of their high growth potential and because their technologies or capabilities make them enablers of activity across the economy generally.

"A key element of the government’s growth strategy is to increase the level of innovation in the economy. These sectors also have the potential to strengthen our ability to innovate," Jim Anderton said.

The 2003/04 Budget provided a $110 million contingency over four years to fund the implementation of initiatives in response to the Taskforce reports.

"This progress report shows that with government and industry working together, we are making real progress in lifting New Zealand’s economic performance," Jim Anderton said.

**Some of the highlights include:**

·The $12.5 million "Better by Design" strategy aimed at assisting New Zealand companies to use world class design to better compete in export markets was kicked off in May this year with an international design conference in Auckland attended by more than 800 business people. Implementation of the strategy, which contains a raft of practical initiatives, is overseen by the Better by Design Advisory Board made up of key design leaders;

·The Futureintech programme, a Government-funded initiative of the Institution of Professional Engineers, has been set up to encourage more young Kiwis to become technologists, engineers and scientists.

·The 321 Go Global programme, run by entrepreneurship centre the ICEHOUSE is successfully running courses for owners and senior managers of New Zealand companies focusing on offshore markets and anticipating substantial growth over the next 12 months.

·The $12 million Australia New Zealand Biotechnology Partnership Fund (ANZBPF), administered by NZTE, has been established to facilitate and accelerate trans-Tasman biotechnology industry collaboration - developing greater regional critical mass will give Australian and New Zealand biotech companies better access to global market opportunities.

·the Large Budget Screen Grant scheme has been set up to attract large film productions to New Zealand, and Major Regional Initiatives (MRIs) have been developed in both Wellington and Auckland to assist with building infrastructure for the screen industry.

·Administered by the Tertiary Education Commission, the Growth and Innovation Pilots provide funding for tertiary education organisations to deepen linkages with the biotechnology, design, and ICT sectors.

"Clearly steady progress is being made in implementing the components of the four growth strategies and we can look forward to the spin-offs for other sectors also. The experience with these four Taskforces proved the value of engaging with sectors and led the Government to establish the Food and Beverage Sector Taskforce, which is due to complete its work by June 2006," said Mr Anderton

For information about the Growth and Innovation Framework as whole, see www.gif.med.govt.nz

The original reports of four GIF Sector Taskforces are available at: http://www.nzte.govt.nz/section/13680.aspx

The suite of six cabinet papers responding to the Taskforces’ reports are available at: http://www.med.govt.nz/irdev/econ\_dev/growth-innovation/overview-cross/index.html