---
title: "New Fiordland Guardians appointed"
date: 2005-07-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23616
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Environment Minister Marian Hobbs today announced the appointment of eight members to the Fiordland Marine Guardians, a new advisory committee created under the Fiordland (Te Moana o Atawhenua) Marine Management Act.  
The Fiordland Marine Guardians will be responsible for providing advice to management agencies and ministers on the management of the Fiordland (Te Moana o Atawhenua) Marine Area. The guardians will elect their own chair at their first meeting.  
"In appointing the eight members I had to ensure there was a balanced mix of knowledge and experience in relation to the Fiordland (Te Moana o Atawhenua) Marine Area,” Marian Hobbs said.

"Each of the eight people has extensive knowledge of different aspects of the industry, science, community or customary knowledge. I believe that this group will enjoy the collective respect of the community."

Alan Keys, a long-term recreational fishing representative has fished in Fiordland for 28 years. He is well known within the community.  
Alan Mark, an emeritus Professor at Otago University, has been heavily involved in conservation management for 30 years and is highly respected in this field.  
Ian Buick operates a helicopter operation from Te Anau and has strong contacts with aviation and charter operators in Fiordland.  
John Steffens, has been the chair of the community group, the Guardians of Fiordland since their inception. He is a well-respected and credible community figure who also has significant experience in commercial fishing and fisheries management.  
Ken Grange, Regional Manager of NIWA Nelson is a pre-eminent marine scientist. He has a broad understanding of general marine science and in particular the Fiordland marine environment.  
Laurel Teirney operates a resource management consultancy from Dunedin. She has a fisheries management and fisheries science background and has been the facilitator for the Guardians of Fiordland community group for a number of years.  
Malcolm Lawson is the Chief Executive of the CR8 (rock management) committee. He is heavily involved in commercial fisheries management in Fiordland.  
Stewart Bull has extensive knowledge of customary uses of Fiordland (particularly customary fishing) he represents the Oraka-Aparima Runanga in a number of committees.

Seven of the eight members were previously members of the Guardians of Fiordland’s Fisheries and Marine Environment.

"These appointments provide continuity with the community group and will make sure that the momentum of this important work is not lost," Marian Hobbs said.

"I congratulate all of the appointees and look forward to meeting them all at the launch of the Fiordland marine management regime on 30 July 2005."