---
title: "Ngati Mutunga Deed of Settlement signed"
date: 2005-07-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23838
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations
---

The Crown and Ngati Mutunga today signed a Deed of Settlement at a ceremony at Urenui Marae, Treaty Negotiations Minister Mark Burton said.

The Deed of Settlement provides for the comprehensive settlement of all Ngati Mutunga’s historical Treaty of Waitangi claims in Taranaki. The signing follows the initialling of the Deed in December 2004 and its ratification by the people of Ngati Mutunga earlier this month.

“The people of Ngati Mutunga have suffered from confiscation and warfare in Taranaki at the hands of the Crown. This has had a devastating effect on their welfare, economy, social and economic development. While the settlement cannot fully redress all wrongs suffered by Ngati Mutunga, it will contribute towards their economic development," Mark Burton said.

The settlement includes:  
·acknowledgements by the Crown of historical breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi and its principles, and an apology for those breaches;  
·a cultural redress package that reflects Ngati Mutunga’s traditional, historical, cultural and spiritual associations to places and sites owned by the Crown within Ngati Mutunga’s area of interest; and  
·financial and commercial redress of $14.9 million.

Further information about the content of the settlement is available in the settlement summary, available online at www.ots.govt.nz.

Ngati Mutunga have also ratified a governance entity to receive and manage the settlement assets. The Deed is now conditional only on the passage of legislation giving effect to the settlement, expected by early 2006.

“This is the fourth Taranaki settlement to have been completed, continuing what has been a very busy year in Treaty settlements. Three settlement acts have been passed, and strong progress is being made in a number of other settlement negotiations.”

The Deed of Settlement is available online at www.ots.govt.nz.