---
title: "Code of practice for filming on conservation land"
date: 2005-07-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23728
ministers:
  - Chris Carter
portfolios:
  - Building Issues
---

New Zealand's film industry and the Department of Conservation today launched a code of practice to promote environmentally friendly filming on land managed for conservation.

"Thanks to high profile movies like Vertical Limit, The Lord of the Rings, The Last Samurai and Chronicles of Narnia, the opportunities New Zealand's spectacular natural areas offer to film-makers are becoming world renowned," Conservation Minister Chris Carter said.

"The Labour-Progressive government recognises screen production as one of the key growth sectors under the Growth & Innovation Framework, and we recognise that access to conservation land for filming is critical to the success of the film industry.

"Nevertheless, it is also vital we address the environmental impacts of filming and set some standards for screen production practises in New Zealand's conservation areas. Our extraordinary natural landscapes are too valuable to risk damaging," Mr Carter said.

"Many film-makers have developed good production practises over the years. Today's code of practice formalises those practises and lays down a framework for successful co-operation between DOC and the film industry in the future."

Film New Zealand chief executive Judith McCann said conservation and filming were natural partners.

"Our dramatic and beautiful natural areas are a significant draw-card to international film-makers. New Zealand's natural heritage offers a stage unlike any other, but it is important that the film industry can get access to it. By developing guidelines on filming activities we can make sure we can take our pictures and leave only footprints."

Copies of the code are available at www.doc.govt.nz