---
title: "Good decision-making not on National's RMA agenda"
date: 2005-07-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23760
ministers:
  - David Benson-Pope
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Criticism of an Environment Court decision not to grant a consent for a lumber mill in Coromandal is a stark reminder of National's approach to planning, says Associate Environment Minister David Benson-Pope.

Mr Benson-Pope says National's Environment spokesman Nick Smith has confirmed his party's intention to gut the Resource Management Act. Today Mr Smith issued a media release criticising decisions made by the Environment Court after the hearing of evidence about a mill project near scenic Whangapoua.

In deciding not to grant a consent for the new sawmill the Environment Court cited a number of concerns including opposition from the local community, which included local Maori, and the threat posed to the environment.

"For some time National have been promising to gut the RMA but have failed to give any details," said Mr David Benson-Pope. "It is clear that this has been a deliberate strategy to avoid scrutiny of a policy that will do away with community consultation in major projects to give free licence to developers.

"Mr Smith has confirmed that his plan is to completely shut local communities out of decisions that will affect the every day lives of those communities.

"The Court decided that this project posed more problems than it solved. That is going to happen sometimes, there will often be competing interests. The answer is to have robust processes that carefully and thoughtfully weigh up those interests and give good decisions. National is clearly saying that it will throw out the rule book so that haphazard development can go ahead unimpeded."

Mr Benson-Pope confirmed that between 2000 and this year there had been at least 11 new mill projects or mill expansions in New Zealand worth over $110 million. Over the next four years there has already been publicly announced a further 8 new mills or mill expansion projects worth in excess of $470million. He says this is under the current RMA provisions, which are set to be further improved by a Bill now before Parliament.

"New Zealanders value the environment and understand the need to balance the demands of the economy with people's expectations to live in and enjoy our spaces," said Mr Benson-Pope. "That requires good planning processes that balance these competing demands. Mr Smith has shown that all the National Party really cares about is unfettered development."