---
title: "Advisory Committee on Official Statistics announced"
date: 2005-07-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23723
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Statistics
---

Moves to further improve the provision of official statistics took a step forward today with the announcement of the establishment of the Advisory Committee on Official Statistics (ACOS).

ACOS will be an independent body with a remit to provide the Minister of Statistics with advice on key official statistics produced by government. It is to be chaired by  
former Minister of Finance, and recent Chair of the Accident Compensation Commission, Hon David Caygill.

"The value of official statistics to New Zealand originates in the quality of what information is collected, how it is processed and then made available," says Minister of Statistics Pete Hodgson. "As our society and economy continues to change, it's important the collection and provision of statistics keep pace with that change. ACOS has been established to help ensure that happens.

"The range and quality of appointments to the committee gives me confidence that it will do a good job. ACOS's establishment is a significant development in the continued increase in value of official statistics to New Zealand."

In addition to the Chair, the nine committee members are:

Professor Dick Bedford (Deputy Vice Chancellor, Research, Waikato University)

Dr Peter Bushnell (Deputy Secretary to The Treasury)

Dr Bryan Jenkins (Chief Executive Environment Canterbury)

Marcel Lauziere (Deputy Chief Executive Ministry of Social Development)

Jas McKenzie (former Secretary of Labour)

Phil O'Reilly (Chief Executive Business New Zealand)

Roger Proctor (Group Manager Ministry of Economic Development)

Emeritus Professor Alastair Scott (Department of Statistics Auckland University)

Professor Linda Tuhiwai Smith (Joint Director Nga Pae o te Maramatanga, the National Institute of Research Excellence in Maori Development and Advancement, hosted by the University of Auckland)

The Government Statistician, Brian Pink also joins the ACOS committee as an  
ex-officio member.