---
title: "Lets get it sorted by Christmas, says Pete Hodgson"
date: 2005-07-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23663
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

"Let's get it sorted by Christmas" was Transport Minister Pete Hodgson's message on his visit to the Waikato today to kick off work on a special transport funding package for the region.

"The Waikato is a large region with complex and disparate transport needs," says Pete Hodgson. "In order to meet them, an unprecedented amount of regional  
co-operation will be needed. We must have buy in from every corner of this large and diverse region. All of us must commit the time and effort to get this process done and I think December is achievable.

"There are more local authorities involved in the development of Waikato's special funding package than in any other the government has undertaken so far. Waikato is bigger and more diverse than Auckland, Wellington or the Bay of Plenty.

"Clearly one focus must be on State Highway One and State Highway Two. Equally, we need to pay attention to many other issues from passenger transport to rural road safety.

"I am hoping that we can extract early value from the Regional Land Transport Strategy, still under development, so that we can complete the funding package before the Strategy is completed next year.

"The region's Labour MPs, Dianne Yates, Nanaia Mahuta and Martin Gallagher, have worked hard to secure this package for the Waikato. Now the region has a lot of work ahead of it in terms of identifying and agreeing on its transport priorities. Waikato communities should not have to wait for this to be completed before the government takes action. That's why officials will start work on the special funding package shortly to run alongside the development of the RLTS. I want to see this sorted out before Christmas."

"The region welcomes the Minister's initiative and thanks him for agreeing that the Waikato has a unique and complex challenge to address in meeting its transport infrastructure needs. We look forward to working together to provide a safe and efficient system for all who use it," says Jenni Vernon, Chairman Environment Waikato.

**Contact: Christian Judge, press secretary, 04 471 9707, 021 670 349**  
[Christian.judge@parliament.govt.nz](http:christian.judge@parliament.govt.nz)