---
title: "Role of the State in the Energy Sector"
date: 2005-07-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23605
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Thank you for inviting me to participate in the NGC Winter Lecture series, and to discuss what I see as the role of the state in the energy sector.

Let me begin by commenting that the Labour-led government is committed to providing security and certainty for all New Zealanders when it comes to energy supply - for families, communities and business. The policies and regulations that are in place are all designed to reflect this critical goal.

I believe there is little argument with the idea that the state must control the regulatory framework of the energy sector - that is, the laws and regulations under which the market can work, and in which investors and customers can have confidence over the long-term.

And it follows from this, that a minimum number of regulatory institutions is needed in order to develop the detailed guidelines to ensure the energy industry can flourish and grow, and deliver what New Zealand needs.

We now have the Electricity Commission, the Gas Industry Company and the Commerce Commission, all of which have discrete and clear responsibilities for facilitating the operations of various components of the industry.

While the Electricity Commission and the Gas Company are relatively new entities, I am confident that they are appropriately structured to manage their respective areas of the industry.

These organisations did not get a blank canvas from which to start - they were both given Government Policy Statements that set out the objectives and outcomes which government wanted them to deliver on.

Within these Statements, they have been given a great deal of flexibility in achieving these objectives and outcomes - relatively light-handed regulation, if you like.

Which brings us to the inevitable, and contentious, question of whether the government should have gone further and developed an energy plan that had to be carried out - in effect whether there should have been a return to a form of central planning.

Certainly the government has a role in forecasting and producing alternative scenarios to assist the industry in its long-term planning.

The Ministry of Economic Development is taking significant steps to enhance its capabilities for forecasting and statistical work, and is planning to publish the next version of the Energy Outlook next year.

It also produces a biannual Energy Data File which provides data on New Zealand’s energy supply and demand.

The government must also continue to provide broad oversight, and adjust the framework from time to time if it is found wanting, or if signs of market failure start appearing.

We must also ensure that natural monopolies are handled correctly, that environmental issues are dealt with fairly, and that we remove any barriers to the uptake of energy efficiency projects.

However, I don’t think that making detailed operational decisions is, or needs to be, a role of government.

That said, there is clearly a role for government – particularly in terms of ensuring security of supply and the ensuring the provision of reserve energy to the extent necessary.

The news today that state-owned Genesis Energy is investigating building a new $500 million gas-fired power station on the Kaipara Harbour is an interesting development, given the fact that they have not come to the government to ask for money, nor for any guarantees around gas supply.

As Energy Minister, I am not a shareholding minister so am not privy to information that Genesis may have in relation to this plan - but I certainly wouldn't make this investment unless I thought gas would be available.

However, how this might affect the plans to upgrade the grid into Auckland remains to be seen, and I am neutral on that issue. For instance, this new development may have a positive effect on generation capacity but not necessarily on transmission.

I do agree with the Greens that the first priority for gas is direct household use - it can make a big difference both to water heating and peak use.

In terms of security - there have been some doomsayers popping up in the media recently about security of supply into Auckland. I must say it is disappointing that people who are not energy experts choose to create unnecessary alarm, apparently without checking the facts.

The supply in Auckland is not at crisis point, I am advised it is being operated under normal operational processes with contingency arrangements in place that have not had to be initiated - because there is no crisis.

An industry working group of Transpower and the stakeholders in that region (distribution companies, generators and retailers) meet regularly over contingency planning for times where demand peaks. The Electricity Commission is also charged with monitoring supply and demand and contracting for reserve energy if necessary.

While I am on the subject of misinformation, I can't forego the opportunity to make some other points about myth-making and its dangers.

Firstly, our political opponents' promises are starting to tally up - though they do not seem to be at all enthusiastic about doing their counting in public. That's because they can not make the sums add up. It is no wonder they have backed off producing an alternative budget.

Our research indicates that to make a real difference and in order to be politically attractive, the tax cut has to be worth about $30 a week - the cost of that is $3.2 billion. People are expecting it by Christmas.

Now Brash has promised tax cuts to every worker and a cut in company tax together with increased spending on nurses, teachers, and police officers, and he says this can be paid for by cutting "waste".

National has identified only $511 million in so-called waste - so he needs to find an additional $2.7 billion if he wants to give people what they think they are getting. National can not deliver on this without massive cuts to spending on key services like health and education, or cuts to superannuation, or without making our debt - and interest rates - skyrocket.

I would not call this sound economic management, and I would urge you to scrutinise every promise National makes, as so far we have not seen anything to suggest these promises can actually be fulfilled.

But back to the government role in the energy sector. On the supply side, the government also has to be concerned with the development of renewables, synthetic fuel products, energy efficiency and management of climate change issues.

We have also put in place a number of initiatives to encourage the exploration  
and production of gas. Royalties have been reduced to encourage the  
exploration and development of gas. We have relaxed the tax regime as it relates to upstream exploration to reduce costs for rig operators to  
make it more attractive for explorers.

And $15 million in funding has been provided for the acquisition of geophysical seismic data through a seismic survey that will produce free data for would-be investors in exploration off our coast. The availability of this data is being actively promoted.

Let me turn now to the issue of government ownership of energy systems and facilities.

As a result of historical decisions, we do own five energy State Owned Enterprises - three generating companies, Transpower and Solid Energy.

And that’s no bad thing, as our government has a very clear policy that vital strategic assets are best held under public ownership.

A substantial proportion of government-owned generation is in renewables - principally hydro, but also latterly, in wind.

And renewable generation must be our number one long-term target.

Our government is supporting the uptake of renewables through a series of measures.

There is a wide range of promotional, industry development and market facilitation measures - driven by the National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy target to increase energy supply from renewable sources by 30 Petajoules per annum by 2012.

Emission units are awarded under the Projects to Reduce Emissions mechanism.

We also recognise the benefits of renewable energy in the Resource Management Act and, in some cases, support for individual projects in the resource consent process.

A sustainable energy framework to help inform decision-making on energy choices was launched late last year.

The framework was produced to identify the energy challenges and opportunities facing New Zealand and explain the government’s strategic direction in energy policy. Its aim is to also explain how energy and energy-related policies work in inside that strategy, and to identify possible future directions for policy development.

The framework also highlights the two key long-term challenges that our energy system will face - global climate change and the peak in global oil production.

Consultation on this framework revealed a loud call for increased energy efficiency measures and greater use of renewable energy supply.

These measures enhance security of supply, limits environmental impacts and reduces the cost of energy.

They also lie at the very heart of our commitment to sustainable energy - a commitment which is consistent with similar commitments made by many other countries.

There is a large untapped potential to improve energy efficiency and further develop renewables, even at current prices.

That brings us to the big questions - how hard and how fast do we need to go?

The fact is - sooner we all make the necessary changes in behaviour and technology deployment, the better.

Rapid transition to an efficient and renewable energy system is crucial to energy risk management - and the risks we need to manage are real and are pressing.

We need to meet our international climate change obligations and eventually, we need to wean ourselves off our dependency on oil.

Our international competitiveness is underpinned by efficient energy use and supply, while our health depends on having affordably warm homes.

The Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority - or EECA - oversees the implementation of the National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy.

In a real sense, the strategy practically addresses the important parts of climate change, economic and sustainable energy policies.

It was always designed to be a whole of government strategy.

It explicitly requires specific publicly-funded agencies - including EECA - to lead the implementation of policies, and this happens often in partnerships with the private sector.

Since the strategy was launched in 2001, however, the world has moved on.

And that is why an interdepartmental review is underway, which is likely to lead to the strategy’s replacement in 2006.

To return to my earlier question -

Now, more than ever, we all need to go harder and faster with the strategy, and ensure that we have the necessary supporting policies and resources in place to meet out targets.