---
title: "First World Broadband: Moving up the OECD Rankings."
date: 2005-07-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23811
ministers:
  - David Cunliffe
portfolios:
  - Communications and Information Technology
---

"As much market as possible; as much regulation as necessary"

Good morning ladies and gentleman.

It is an old adage now, but it is timely to recall it. It has been a guiding statement for this Government's telecommunications policy – and indeed its economic development stance more generally.

It represents an effective balance between two key sets of tools.

It positions the Government in the OECD mainstream.

And it stands in sharp contrast to the approach of the previous government and current opposition.

Today it is timely to step back and reflect upon the great challenge that is before us – to lead NZ into the top quartile of the OECD for broadband usage.

In doing so I will recap very briefly the nature of that challenge – it is well known to this audience – then focus on the Government's plan to meet it.

That plan has two pillars. First, unlocking demand for and directly stimulating supply of broadband services via the digital strategy.

Second, supporting the development of a dynamic, well functioning, competitive market through appropriate regulation.

I will conclude by wrapping up the next steps.

Let me begin by reiterating both the magnitude and the critical importance to New Zealand of the broadband challenge, illustrated by an example.

A few years ago, the Republic of Korea made a massive investment in broadband infrastructure.

Korea telecom, Hanaro and others invested so heavily (with more than a little government persuasion) that the sceptics argued they would never make a commercial return.

For a short time, despite Korea's national advantages of population density and "Chaebol" ICT capabilities, it momentarily looked like advanced broadband was nothing more that a platform for chatrooms, on-line gaming, pornography and SPAM (more on that later).

But the sceptics were wrong.

Korea's optic fibre backbone delivers breathtaking connectivity of 100gbps and up.

This has provided a world-leading on-line environment for the development of advanced applications. Lat year a Korea Telecom consortium was trialling digital service that included two-way Digital TV, remote inspection, home security, remote-video medical consultation, and Internet broadcast services.

Korea ICT giants Samsung and Hyundai, now bestride the world stage from a global leadership position.

And Korea has successfully created a technology platform that differentiates it from the rapidly developing low cost but medium-technology industrial dynamo in the nearby Chinese Pearl River delta.

Question: Would any of this have happened if by magic, Maurice Williamson had run Korean ICT policy throughout the 1990's?

Answer: not a snowflake's chance. Maurice's legendary patience with the perfection of the unfettered market would have seen lower levels of investment and no technology leapfrog.

New Zealand is not Korea.

We don't have a half our population living in easily-cabled high-rise apartment blocks.

But in many ways our starting point is better.

We have a highly-educated, innovative, English-speaking population that loves gadgets. After all we gobbled up eftpos and leapt onto the internet.

So how does our broadband performance stack up?

The OECD was fairly blunt in its 2005 report on New Zealand.

While praising our Digital strategy they told us the earth shattering news that our mobile phone charges were too high and that our broadband uptake puts us in the bottom third of countries.

To state the obvious. That is not nearly good enough.

Let me be very clear on this. This Government regards world-class broadband infrastructure as a critical national capability for the 21st century.

I have a wonderful three year old son. He's a fantastic kid: smart, good looking, athletic – everything his Dad isn't.

He has one major behavioural problem – he doesn't like to go to bed. It drives Mum nuts and Dad to the limits of patience.

He pushes bedtime to the limit. But eventually it dawns on him that he is headed there by one of two means – the easy way or the hard way.

Maybe there is a lesson in that for telecommunications.

There are two ways to address the paradox of investment – to deal with the potential gap between the commercial need for a short term return on investment, and the public interest in a world class broadband infrastructure.

Or, to use the jargon of economics – to internalise the externalities of non-excludable public goods and to address the market failures of overly-concentrated market.

Broadband is our ticket to play in the global knowledge space. Without it our researchers cannot interact seamlessly with their colleagues abroad.

Our business cannot access customers or deliver virtual products and services with the speeds that global markets now demand.

And our children will be starved of the educational opportunities they need to compete and excel in the world of tomorrow.

The question, therefore, is not if we need a step-change in broadband performance, but how we get it.

Telecom New Zealand tells me they will achieve their commitment of 250,000 broadband connections by the year's end.

However, to be in the top quartile of the OECD, we need 600,000 now and likely 800,000 by 2011.

In other words – we must convert or upgrade three quarters of the existing narrowband connections over the next five years.

What's holding us back?

I call it the paradox of investment. In the face of rapid and fundamental technology change, telcos worldwide face a tough choice of either:

- investing heavily now in next –generation technology and risk cannibalising existing revenue stream; or
- working the existing assets for as long and hard as possible and play a defensive game vis-a-vis competitors, regulators and entrants.
  
  - These choices must be made in a world where VOIP is coming down the pipe at the speed of light;
    
    Where grid and utility computing is commoditising processing power and creating huge new opportunities for telcos to provide bandwidth to connect these grids.
    
    And where miniaturisation, intelligent peripherals and RFID are revolutionising mobile applications.
    
    I would argue that the defensive game is the wrong game. The only place for telcos to be, and for New Zealand to be, is positioned for the future – not fighting a rearguard action for the past.
    
    Telecom's NGN backbone will of course be critical in New Zealand. Telecom assures me that it is investing as rapidly as conditions allow.
    
    I guess I'm not sure yet on that point. I am still waiting for detailed briefings on NGN. Neither the Government nor the market have yet seen a definite rollout timeline and coverage targets.
    
    I would ask the markets to understand that rolling out a network like NGN, while very capital intensive, will bring benefits that will move New Zealand up a big step in terms of broadband infrastructure. More importantly it will move Telecom to a new level in terms of being able to add value for rich content, applications and services over that network. I think this is where the future lies for telcos around the globe.
    
    Investors need returns. The country needs ubiquitous broadband. My job is to ensure those needs are brought together.
    
    The business of business is business. I know because I used to work there.
    
    But the business of government is governing: supporting the market to be the best it can be; stimulating it judiciously and appropriately were possible; and making clear where the limits of acceptable behaviour are when necessary.
    
    The easy way is the Digital Strategy. It’s a win-win set of demand structures and supply enablers with a $400 million price tag.
    
    The hard way is the regulatory toolbox. More on that later.
    
    **Digital Strategy**
    
    The Digital Strategy is not primarily about technology. It’s is about making sure all New Zealanders have the confidence and capability to use technology and are connected so they can make the most of the digital opportunities open to them.
    
    The strategy is a whole of government approach. For the first time we have mapped what we are doing, have identified the gaps and have basically doubled our investment to that space.
    
    I think it is fair to say that it has been well received by industry, community groups and local government in New Zealand. It has been recognised by the OECD and by Australian commentators.
    
    The Digital Strategy is really about shifting from supply-push to demand-pull by unlocking latent demand and creating new demand.
    
    There are three key demand enablers – content, confidence, and connection – and three demand centres – communities, business and government. It set out the key challenges that lie ahead, and put forward specific targets to be attained within definite timeframes.
    
    Addressing each of these areas will help to create an environment where ICT can be used in new and productive ways to grow the ICT sector, increase our rate of economic development and enhance our cultural and social well being.
    
    **Content**
    
    In the area of content we are seeking to unlock New Zealand’s immense store of information that is potentially valuable to businesses, communities and individuals.
    
    National Library is doing excellent work in this area and what I am looking forward to seeing next year is the e-content strategy "New Zealand on-line". I am expecting it to the subject of future budget bids and will address it in more detail at on another occasion.
    
    **Confidence**
    
    Today I want to focus some attention on the confidence dimension and in doing so announce the introduction to Parliament this morning of the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Bill.
    
    The Digital Strategy seeks to provide all New Zealanders with the digital skills and confidence to find and use the information they need; and to ensure that telecommunications and the Internet in New Zealand are reliable and secure.
    
    New threats are emerging to undermine our confidence online. Although the Internet offers great benefits, it is subject to the malign actions of spammers, virus writers and fraudsters.
    
    These days, three-quarters of unfiltered email is spam. Criminals have gained access to a whole new world of scams such as phishing and banking fraud.
    
    Most of us will be familiar with unsolicited emails offering us various pills, software deals, access to money from some fake deceased African leader and fake bank notices seeking personal ID information.
    
    The government, in line with the approach being taken internationally, is promoting a multi-tiered strategy to address the threat of spam. The elements of this strategy are legislation, education and technical measures.
    
    This legislation is important in preventing New Zealand from being seen as a haven for spammers, fostering good e-marketing practice and serving as a basis for international cooperation.
    
    The Bill applies to emails, text messaging and instant messaging services by requiring that the sending of commercial electronic messages of a marketing nature over these services be made only to recipients who have opted-in to receive such messages. Senders of non-commercial promotional electronic messages will be required to abide by requests from recipients to opt-out of further mailings.
    
    I believe the bill represents international best practice and is the result of a lot of consultation with industry and interested parties. We have had enthusiastic support from businesses and consumers alike.
    
    The enforcement agency for the legislation will be the Department of Internal Affairs, which already has expertise in the area of cyber crime.
    
    The industry will, however, have a key role under the legislation as all customer complaints will first need to be addressed by their service provider who, where appropriate, may refer the matter on to the enforcement agency for further action.
    
    I have been encouraged by the responsible approach that the industry has taken to date on the issue of spam. The Telecommunications Carriers Forum issued an anti-spam code of practice for short messaging services earlier this year and is currently in the process of producing a similar code of practice for email in conjunction with the Internet Society of New Zealand.
    
    Many ISP’s already follow good practice in dealing with spam by installing spam filtering software and virus protection, as well as providing an effective complaint handling service and removing users hosted by them who are responsible for sending spam.
    
    I also see the industry as having a role in educating their customers on how to be responsible users so as to minimise the risks associated with online activities. Government and industry are both supporting a major National Computer Security Education Campaign co-ordinated by the Internet Safety Group in the coming months.
    
    With much of the spam received in New Zealand originating from overseas, international measures and cooperation will be important in helping to combat the growth of spam. The Ministry of Economic Development has recently signed up to a multilateral anti-spam memorandum of understanding between agencies from a number of Asia Pacific countries. In addition, the OECD and International Telecommunications Union are active in developing resources and putting in place policies to help combat spam. We aim to be at the forefront of that effort.
    
    It will be a great pleasure to take this bill through the House and to see it in action. This is not a silver bullet, it is part of a coordinated, multi-tiered approach to the problem, but it will make a positive difference.
    
    **Connection**
    
    Of course the third key enabler is connection.
    
    As you know our target is to achieve upper-quartile OECD broadband performance by 2010 – this means a far higher uptake by residential customers, probably around 80 percent. In other words, to compete with our target OECD peers today, we would need over 600,000 residential broadband connections. By 2010 that will mean at least 800,000 broadband customers.
    
    This government has demonstrated the importance it places on broadband by investing in a number of initiatives.
    
    PROBE has dragged broadband into areas where it wasn't previously viable. The Government has invested around $43 million to date. There is now 95 per cent coverage in New Zealand and that will be further extended.
    
    We are investing in an advanced research network for Universities, Crown Research Institutes and other pre-commercial users. This is an exciting project and there are some interesting bids for the tender.
    
    We are putting up $20 million for the Broadband challenge, which will help to fund fast networks on open access principles for 15 locations throughout the country. We already have a project manager who is out discussing the project with interested parties. It appears that quite is a queue forming already so it looks like we will meet our target of 15 roll outs by 2009.
    
    It will be up to the Digital Strategy Advisory group to finalise criteria for choosing who to fund. While telcos will not be excluded from participating, the open access principle will be paramount.
    
    We are establishing the Government Shared Network. This will allow the government to share a secure high-speed network for the enormous amounts of data that is pushed around from agency to agency. The network will leverages scale and open access fibre to deliver lower unit cost with improved security.
    
    When you look at these initiatives together it is evident that the government is very serious about where it stimulates the development of high-speed networks. We also hope that these projects can start to provide models for private sector initiatives that might wish to, for example, bundle demand and overcome bottlenecks over the 'last mile'.
    
    So progress is being made for rural areas, researchers and government. There has also been progress on business and residential areas. But there are many who are unhappy with that progress. Ordinary New Zealanders want more connections, faster connection and cheaper connections and I am one of those people.
    
    **Regulatory Tools**
    
    This is where I turn to the other side of the equation in terms of tools available to the government to improve connectivity: creating competition for the benefit of end users through the regulatory process.
    
    The difficulty inherent in the regulatory process, in a market economy at least, is balancing the disincentives for anticompetitive behaviour with incentives for investment. This is particularly true in telecommunications where technology change over networks involves large and potentially risky investments.
    
    Markets can be inherently conservative in this regard. Shareholders demand the highest possible return on their investment. The paradox of investment is that, at certain times, organisational conservatism must be overcome for a company to make the kind of investment required to succeed in times of rapid technology shifts. I believe we are in one of those times.
    
    Sitting on legacy investments and fighting for the right to squeeze every drop of worth from them will only lead to a decline in value for the owners as a company is leapfrogged by those with the vision to invest in the future.
    
    I believe that with the Telecommunications Act we have a regulatory system that can provide the appropriate incentives and disincentives to market players. I have a confession to make. Some of my best friends are lawyers. Some are competition lawyers with big clients who, with the optical acuity of Nelson's telescope at Trafalgar seem not to have notices the intended meaning of the Act's purpose clause.
    
    Let me be very clear. The Telecommunications Act has a pro-competitive consumer test with an appropriate long term efficiency subtest. This was clear at the time of the LLU decision.
    
    We are undertaking an implementation review of the Telecommunications Act. It is really an exercise in refining and streamlining to ensure that the Act works as well as it can.
    
    We are also watching very closely the progress of bitstream and fixed public data network unbundling to ensure that the promise it offers is not thwarted. Progress so far is reasonably encouraging:
    
    Take up of residential broadband is on track to meet Telecom's target, with around 180,000 connections from a 2005 target of 250,000.
    
    However more work will be required for Telecom to achieve its commitment of one third or 83,000 of those connections to be wholesaled.
    
    Again, let me spell it out for anyone who has not noticed, the Government regards a healthy and competitive broadband wholesaling market as essential. Telecom New Zealand's wholesaling commitment is important, and a response will follow if it is not met.  
    The price of residential and business broadband has reduced and service capability has improved but I am convinced that demand elasticity will allow further price reductions to create a virtuous cycle of retail service development. Let's get basic broadband below a dollar a day.
    
    Telecom is also making progress in building a next generation network capable of delivering a full range of broadband based multi-services for residential and small business users, and we look forward to seeing a definite timetable for mass market service delivery.
    
    We will be looking to broadband service competition in so-called double and triple play services such as VOIP and video conferencing to stimulate more competitive pricing in fixed network telephone services.
    
    I currently have before me a decision to make on Mobile termination Rates. There appears little doubt that these rates are too high. Our own benchmarking, the OECD and the Commerce Commission are in agreement on this issue. However, there are a number of complex issues to work through as with any such decision. I hope to be able to make a public announcement on this issue in the reasonably near future.
    
    I am watching with interest the work the Commerce Commission is doing on UBS. The conference has been held, people have had their say. I am aware of an very strong opinion in the industry that 128k upstream is a constraint. Like the Commissioner I do not regard the proposed regulated 128k service as an upper limit. On the contrary, it should be seen as a baseline and I expect commercial offerings in the market above that level.
    
    The TCF is working towards achieving full local number portability in 2006 and mobile number portability by April 2007. I am pleased that after way too long progress is being made on this issue.
    
    There has been a recent decision on co-location. I acknowledge here the Telecommunications Commissioner's rejection was driven by difficulties with the Act and this will be addressed through the implementation review.
    
    So as you can see there is plenty of important work going on in the regulatory space to improve connection.
    
    I have repeated today this Government's view that there is more to do, particularly on wholesaling, and the seriousness with which the Government, unlike our opposition, takes this challenge. Maurice Williamson said in a recent article that as Minister he found the hardest thing to do was to do almost nothing. In that regard I would argue he was a tremendous success.
    
    **Conclusion**
    
    You have asked me to address you today on the subject of how New Zealand can move into the top quartile of OECD performance.
    
    I have been frank with you as to the magnitude of that challenge, and the "paradox of investment", and the related economic issues that relate to it.
    
    I have emphasised the government regards a world class broadband infrastructure as a matter of critical importance. Broadband connectivity is our ticket to play in the global commercial commons. The need is urgent and a step change is required.
    
    It is important to acknowledge that in the past two years substantial progress has been made. Broadband connections grew 80 percent in 2003 and some 200 percent in 2004. Telecom is on target to meet its residential target, its NGN architecture plans sound promising but more information on speed, coverage and conditions of rollout are required. Further consideration of the wholesale market may also be required.
    
    I've outlined what we are doing as a Government in terms of investment and the tools available to us. My strong preference is that we move forward by working in a positive way, as embodied in the Digital Strategy, where incentives and vision take precedence over regulation and legal battles.
    
    Someone in the telco industry said recently when remarking on our goals that the top of the OECD will be a very crowded place because everyone wants to be there.
    
    I was reminded of this when I caught some of the Tour de France last week. As the sprint for the finish line began the racers were elbow to elbow and head down fighting to get over the line.
    
    It was crowded alright but they were totally focused and prepared to take risks to get there. That is the focus and commitment we need because we are in just as tough a race.