---
title: "Smoking"
date: 1998-08-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/smoking
ministers:
  - John Delamare
portfolios:
  - Associate Minister of Health
---

I will defend absolutely the right of an individual to smoke, if that is their choice. However, this must be balanced by what I believe is the greater right of non-smokers not to have to involuntarily breathe in cigarette smoke.

Most people who smoke tobacco are enslaved by an addictive and deadly drug; a drug which causes more than 4500 New Zealanders a year to die from smoking-related diseases.

Smoking tobacco costs the New Zealand taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars a year to deal with the consequences of those illnesses and deaths.

That's why I declared recently that it was my intention to make it as hard as possible for the tobacco companies to carry out their business in this country.

Not surprisingly, I have been attacked and vilified by the tobacco companies for honestly declaring my intentions, the very same companies who are now being forced by the courts in America to open up their secret research files which clearly show they knew years ago about the dangerous consequences of nicotine addiction and, further, their disgraceful marketing campaigns which target the young.

It is indeed ironic to be accused of dishonest dealings by companies which are now being ordered by the American courts to hand over billions of dollars in a belated attempt to repair some of the terrible damage they have caused.

Even in the face of all those class action suits, there is evidence aplenty that the tobacco companies, in a desperate effort to replace the consumers they are helping to kill off, go out of their way to circumvent the restrictions on advertising and display of tobacco products in this country.

A recent example was pointed out by Peter Calder, in the New Zealand Herald, where he showed how the tobacco companies are engaging in what appears suspiciously like subliminal advertising in a magazine directed straight at the youth market.

I have nothing against business, indeed I strongly support it. But I do not support businesses that knowingly deal in harmful drugs and at the same time spend billions of dollars all around the world denying that their products are dangerous and trying to get our young people hooked on their products.

The tobacco companies argue that they are good corporate citizens, that they pay taxes. Those taxes, in my view, are simply blood money for the deaths of our fellow citizens. Furthermore, if the companies paid the full health costs for the harm their products cause, their tax bill would really make their eyes water.

I reject the editorial nonsense put out by the tobacco companies. Their products are harmful, they know it, and I intend to ensure their activities in this country are made as difficult as possible.