---
title: "Youth Radio In Focus At Parliament"
date: 2000-08-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10027
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

Youth radio was the focus of an all-day forum at Parliament Buildings today, hosted by the Minister of Broadcasting, Marian Hobbs. The Minister of Youth Affairs, Laila Harre, also attended.

A cross section of 40 broadcasters and young people explored ways to enhance radio services for young people enabling all participants to develop a greater understanding of the youth radio market and hear from the key parties involved, Marian Hobbs said.

The previous government's decision for a national youth radio network is on hold pending re-examination of the best means for meeting youth needs.

“This Forum provided an opportunity for broadcasters and young people to discuss the implications of research undertaken by the Ministry for Culture and Heritage and to work collaboratively on identifying possible measures the Government could take to enhance the provision of radio services targeted at young people,” Marian Hobbs said.

The Ministry for Culture and Heritage has undertaken research into the youth radio market and held focus groups with young people, and participants at the Forum were asked to respond to the findings.

“We are very keen to work together to identify solutions in a consultative and collaborative manner," Marian Hobbs said. "I believe that the best outcome will be achieved where the Government and the broadcasting industry work together to serve the interests of New Zealand’s youth.”

The Ministry of Culture and Heritage will report to the Minister in the next month on the implications of the research, today's discussions and options for Government involvement in youth radio.