---
title: "Board Appointments To Tvnz And Nz On Air"
date: 2000-08-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10032
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

Five appointments to broadcasting boards have been announced by the Minister of Broadcasting, Marian Hobbs. Three are to TVNZ and two are to New Zealand on Air.

TVNZ:  
Craig Boyce, of Christchurch will chair the board's audit committee. He is the chair of the South Island-based Smith City Group and was Chief Executive from 1990 to 1999. He replaces Whai Dewes who completed his term in March.

Trish Stevenson, of Wellington. She will resign from the NZ on Air board before taking up her new appointment. Ms Stevenson has had a career in the publishing, visual arts and media marketing sectors and is Manager of Learning Media Ltd's international division. She replaces Wayne Brown whose term ended on July 31.

Russell Hewitt, of Auckland. He is the Chief Executive of COMPAQ and has developed a strong familiarity with information technology developments and telecommunications. He replaces Sir Gil Simpson who retired at the end of June.

NZ on Air:  
Gaylene Preston of Wellington. She is one of New Zealand's leading film-makers and has previously served on the NZ Film Commission, the Creative Film Fund, the NZ Film Archive Board and the NZ Producers' and Directors' Guild executive.

James Coleman of Auckland. He has been Channel Z's national network 'Drive' host from 1996. Marian Hobbs said he will be an excellent advocate for youth programming and related issues.

They replace Roger Horrocks and Pamela Meekings-Stewart whose terms have expired.

"All the appointments announced today bring a balanced mix of skills and experience to these public broadcasting boards, " Marian Hobbs said. "I am grateful they have agreed to serve and I also wish to thank those they are succeeding for their dedication."