---
title: "New Environment Court Judge"
date: 2001-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10932
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

Justice Minister and Acting Attorney-General Phil Goff, has announced the appointment of the additional judge to the Environment Court, aimed at helping reduce the case backlog.

Judge Laurie Newhook will be sworn in at the District Court in July and will sit in Auckland.

"The Government has committed an extra $2.1 million over three years to the Environment Court. Judge Newhook's appointment increases the Environment Court bench to seven permanent judges and two alternates.

"Environmentalists and developers alike are frustrated by delays caused by the backlog. The increased funding and expansion of the size of the Environment Court bench will hopefully help alleviate these," Mr Goff said.

Judge Newhook graduated from Auckland University with an LLB (Hons) in 1972 and was admitted to the Bar the same year. Since 1976 he has been a partner of Brookfields and antecedent firms. He practises in resource management, local government and general litigation. The general litigation component has an emphasis on land, maritime matters, construction law and mediation/arbitration work.

In the areas of planning, resource management and local government he has acted for councils, landowners, developers, iwi, community groups and environmental groups. The Judge is an Associate of the Arbitrators and Mediators Institute of New Zealand.

Judge Newhook is aged 50. He is married to Judy, with one daughter and one son