---
title: "New members for Local Government Commission"
date: 2001-06-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10876
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Local Government
---

Local Government Minister Sandra Lee today announced the appointment of three new members to the Local Government Commission.

"Grant Kirby has been appointed as Chairperson for a term of four years, and Kerry Marshall and Linda Constable have been appointed as members for the next three years, " Ms Lee said. "The Commission is a quasi-judicial body that has a range of responsibilities including reporting to the Minister on matters relating to local government and considering proposals for changes to local authority boundaries and structures.

"Grant Kirby has a wealth of local government experience and has held a number of senior positions with the Auckland City Council, " the Local Government Minister said. Until recently, Mr Kirby was the Rodney District Council Commissioner, appointed by Sandra Lee in April 2000 to replace the dysfunctional Rodney District Council.

"Kerry Marshall has 16 years experience as an elected member of local authorities including 9 years as Mayor of Tasman District and prior to reorganization in 1989, Mayor of Richmond Borough. Mr Marshall is also the presiding member of the Lotteries Commission and Chairperson of the Conservation Authority. He is also a former president of Local Government New Zealand.

"Linda Constable is a specialist in resource management law. Ms Constable is Chair of both Orion NZ Limited and Carter Group Limited, and has held previous government appointments, including membership of the Social Advisory Council. She is currently a manager with the Office of Te Runanga O Ngai Tahu in Christchurch.

“The Commission will now be able to progress its existing workload, including appeals against the decision of the Dunedin City Council not to constitute an Otago Peninsula Community Board,” Ms Lee said.

The new members replace Sir Ross Jansen, Bruce Anderson and Barbara Durbin who the Minister thanked for their "valuable contribution to local government in New Zealand".