---
title: "Veterans asked to apply for medals"
date: 2001-06-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10871
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Veterans' Affairs
---

The Minister of Veterans' Affairs Mark Burton says some navy and airforce veterans can apply immediately for the medals they deserve, but were never awarded.

Mark Burton and the Prime Minister Helen Clark this week (June 11) announced that all defence personnel who have been on operational service since 1945 will be eligible to apply for the New Zealand Operational Service Medal (NZOSM).

Five specific medallic grievances, covering service in Japan, Suez, Malaya, Vietnam and Rwanda, have also been addressed.

"We believe that there should be proper recognition of service for one's country," Mark Burton said. "Unfortunately, in these five cases, that recognition has not been adequate."

Veterans and the next of kin of deceased personnel will be able to apply for the medals, as they become available. The details are as follows:

**HMNZ Ships Achilles and Gambia (Japanese waters 1945/6)**  
The crews of these ships will receive the NZ Service Medal 1946-49. This medal is currently in stock but it will need a change to the Royal Warrant to include service aboard the two ships before the medal can be issued. This process will take two or three months and requires The Queen's approval.  
However, navy veterans who consider themselves eligible for the medal may apply now to the Staff Officer-Medals, Personnel Archives, PO Box 905, Upper Hutt.

**Vietnam Medal**  
RNZAF transport aircrew who flew into and within Vietnam during the War are now eligible. Aircrew who consider that they may be eligible for the Vietnam Medal should apply to Staff Officer-Medals, Personnel Archives, PO Box 905, Upper Hutt. Applications should include relevant extracts from logbooks to prove eligibility.

**Naval General Service Medal, clasp "Malaya"**  
This medal is for personnel who served aboard ships that completed 28 days service during the Malayan Emergency.  
The medal has to be minted and it will be the end of the year before it is likely to be available. In the meantime the Defence Force will be working with veterans' groups to ascertain the eligibility of each ship. Once this is done, eligible personnel will be invited to apply for the medal.

**NZ General Service Medal, clasps "Near East", "Vietnam", and "Rwanda"**  
These medals recognise service aboard RNZN Royalist during the 1956 Suez Crisis, service after January 1973 in Vietnam, and service by 35 RNZAF personnel in Rwanda in 1994.  
The Defence Force is drafting regulations for The Queen's approval for these medals. Medals also need to be minted and are not likely to be available until the end of the year. Eligible personnel will be invited to apply nearer that time.

**New Zealand Operational Service Medal (NZOSM)**  
This medal, which is for all personnel who have been on operational service since 1945, needs to be designed, tendered and manufactured. It will be approximately 12 months before the medal is available. Applications will be called for early next year.

The Defence Force will keep veterans' informed through the media, veterans' newsletters, and the RSA Review.  
Anyone wanting to be sent further information should provide their email or postal address to:  
Mike Hanley, Personal Branch, NZ Defence Force, Private Bag, Wellington, or [michael.hanley@nzdf.mil.nz](mailto:michael.hanley@nzdf.mil.nz)).