---
title: "Additional Subjects for University Entrance"
date: 2001-06-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10857
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard says six subjects have been added to the list of approved subjects for University Entrance.

He says that from this year students can also count unit credits in Computing, Drama, Media Studies, Korean, Cook Islands Maori and Samoan towards UE.

"For years, schools have been teaching a broader range of subjects, but students have been held back by the areas in which assessment 'counts'," Trevor Mallard said.

"It makes good sense to add subjects such as computing and languages to those counted towards UE. They reflect the skills needed in a knowledge society and our location as an Asia-Pacific rim country, " he said.

"This expansion of University Entrance subjects has been largely driven by schools and has been done in consultation with universities.

"There is no suggestion that traditional subjects are less important or that all subjects are necessarily of equal worth. But it does confirm that our young people must have exposure and access to all manner of skills and knowledge if this country is to create a comprehensive knowledge society," Trevor Mallard said.

Until now, University Entrance has been limited to the 31 University Bursaries subjects. Secondary school students have been able to gain University Entrance by achieving C grades in three Bursaries examinations or 13 level 3 unit standard credits in three subjects. Subjects outside the Bursaries list have not been included for unit standard credits.

NCEA level 3 will replace University Bursaries in 2004. There will also be a Scholarship examination for students in their final year at school. All of the subjects added to the University Entrance list will have NCEA level 3 achievement standards.