---
title: "Auckland War Memorial Museum upgrade is a different matter from Regional Museums Policy"
date: 2001-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10944
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

"It upsets me that Auckland War Memorial Museum director Rodney Wilson may have given Aucklanders the impression that the government is not committed to New Zealand's museums," says Associate Arts, Culture and Heritage Minister, Judith Tizard.

"Last week, Dr Wilson implied we have put a 'cap' on annual capital costs for all museums, following the announcement of our Regional Museums Policy. In fact, this government has committed $15.05 million over the next three years to regional museums.

"Central government has never before budgeted to help regional museums and galleries with the costs of housing collections of national significance. Central government funding support for museum and gallery projects has been focused on the large metropolitan museums and galleries. The Regional Museums Policy and funding is a huge step ahead for non-metropolitan museums and galleries.

"This is a separate issue from the Auckland War Memorial Museum's application for central government help with its planned $46 million upgrade," says Judith Tizard.

"There is no doubt that the Auckland War Memorial Museum holds extremely important artefacts of national significance. These do need to be housed properly and we are separately considering the museum's plans for a $46.5 million upgrade, just as large projects have been considered separately by central government in the past.

"This government has always regarded regional institutions as primarily a regional responsibility - we cannot relieve local government of its primary responsibility in this area. But we do recognise a role for central government where there are collections of national significance that play such an important part in the way we develop and maintain our sense of national identity."

For example, government contributed $6.474 million towards the new Christchurch Art Gallery in the Cultural Recovery Package last year. "The bulk of the project's $53.432 million (GST inclusive) cost is being covered by the Christchurch City Council with additional funds coming from community fundraising," says Judith Tizard.

"I am pleased that Rodney Wilson does not 'rule out' the possibility that the government is willing to help. This government does care about heritage issues in Auckland and across New Zealand, and is doing far more than any previous government to help support and fund them."

· The Labour-Alliance Government committed $2.55 million in the 2001/02 budget year, with further funding of $5 million in the 2002/3 period, and $7.5 million in the following year. Funding is expected to continue at that third year level into the future.