---
title: "Govt to get diesel problem analysis"
date: 2001-06-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10784
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Energy Minister Pete Hodgson says he expects the refinery to provide a full report on the faulty diesel problem to the Government as soon as possible.

The New Zealand Refining Company has committed to a full review of the problem with diesel fuel that has caused clogged fuel filters in some diesel engines.

"The refinery is backing up its own research with advice from independent international experts and I look forward to seeing the results," Mr Hodgson said.

"I have written to the refinery making it clear that I expect to receive this information as soon as it is available. I reserve the right to seek an independent peer review of the report."

"I have also asked the oil companies to provide separate reports on the matter."

Mr Hodgson said it was important that the findings be combined with the results of the government's own testing, to ensure the fullest possible understanding of what went wrong.

"Neither the public nor the government will tolerate a recurrence of this problem. It is vital that we understand what went wrong, so we can be assured it won't happen again."

The regulations governing the quality and safety of diesel and petrol in New Zealand are currently under review, as announced by Associate Energy Minister Paul Swain in February.

"It is very important that the best possible information on the current diesel problem is fed into that review," Mr Hodgson said.

"The goal of the review is to ensure that consumers have access to petrol and diesel that comply with accepted and up-to-date quality, safety and environmental standards.

"The Government will make urgent changes to the regulations should these be required in response to the current problems with diesel."