---
title: "Building Industry Authority appointments"
date: 2001-06-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10903
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Internal Affairs
---

The Internal Affairs Minister, George Hawkins has today announced seven new appointments to the Building Industry Authority. Mr Hawkins has also reappointed one existing member of the Authority.

The Building Industry Authority is responsible for the administration of the Building Code and providing the Minister of Internal Affairs with advice on amendments to the Code.

Other functions carried out by the Authority include appointing building certifiers, educating the industry about the Building Act and Code, and making determinations about compliance with the Building Code.

Mr Hawkins said the members of the Authority had been carefully selected to provide a balance between technical expertise and the needs of end-users of buildings (see list of members and biographical material below).

"Between them, these eight individuals have significant engineering, architecture and construction expertise as well as experience in management and disability access issues" said Mr Hawkins. "I look forward to working with the new Authority over the next few years".

Contact: Press Secretary, Aimee Wilkins, Phone 04 4719795 or 021 270 9131, aimee.wilkins@parliament.govt.nz

Building Industry Authority Members as at 1 June 2001

Barry Brown (presiding member) is a Director with Fraser Thomas Consulting Engineers of Auckland. He has extensive experience in structural engineering, specialising in building design for earthquake prone areas.

Kemp Broughton, of Ngarauru, Ngati Ruanui and Ngaruahine descent, is Chief Executive of Stratford District Council and a member of the Institute of Professional Engineers.

Peter Fehl, a founding principal of the civil engineering company McKee Fehl, is now a construction and strategic planning consultant based in Wellington.

John Hill is an Auckland architect who has also had a long involvement in local body and community work.

Stephen Meredith is an architectural designer with Opus International in Wellington.

Alexia Pickering, operates her consultancy "Accessible Options" from Hamilton. She has been an advocate for disabled people in the areas of access and design since 1970.

Bill Wrightson, principal of Wrightson Associates, Wellington, has professional and consumer experience in the design and construction of barrier free and safe built environments.

Helena Horswell has been reappointed to the Authority for two years. Until recently a coordinator with Workbridge in Auckland, she now works in the security industry.