---
title: "Green Ribbon Environment Awards"
date: 2001-06-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10811
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Environment Minister, Marian Hobbs, has announced the winners of the 2001 Green Ribbon Awards. The awards will be presented today (5 June) in Wellington to mark World Environment Day.

"I am delighted to be able to recognise the outstanding achievements of individual citizens, businesses, councils and others to sustain and improve our environment," Marian Hobbs said. "With 117 nominations this year in seven categories, it has been a very difficult process to select winners.

"Most New Zealanders want clean water and air and many think our clean, green image is a myth. But there are not so many who pitch in to make a difference the way our Green Ribbon Award nominees do. It is encouraging and inspiring to see the efforts put in by all the people and organisations nominated for the Awards."

The winners of the Green Ribbon Awards are:

Caring for our rural environment  
\* Seresin Estate, Renwick, Marlborough, for a wide range of environmental management initiatives on its 44 hectare vineyard and 10 hectare olive grove

Caring for our urban environment  
\* The New Zealand Ecological Restoration Network, Christchurch, for the establishment of a network to share experience and resources in native habitat restoration.

Business caring for the environment  
\* Orion New Zealand Limited, Christchurch, for its Demand Side Management Project to control and limit the growth of maximum demand for electricity by promoting energy efficiency and other measures.

Caring for our biodiversity  
\* Russell Langdon, Ashburton, for the development of the Hawthorn Wood Wild Fowl and Wetland Reserve and a captive breeding programme for endangered waterfowl.

State of the Environment Reporting (two awards)  
\* Waikato State of the Environment Report 1998, Environment Waikato, Hamilton  
\* Our City’s Environment 2000. Palmerston North City Council, Palmerston North.

Raising awareness of the environment  
\* Dean Williams (Green Dean), Auckland, for the “Green Desk” programme on environmental issues on 95bFM radio.

Kids who care – youth award  
\* Paparore School, Awanui (Far North), for its efforts to replant five hectares of land in native trees and other environmental activities.

The Minister for the Environment also made special mention of three strong nominations which are achieving excellent results:  
\* The Waitakere Ranges Protection Society, Waitakere City  
\* 0800 Smokey campaign, Auckland Regional Council  
\* Waicare stream monitoring and action programme, Auckland.