---
title: "United States urged to take prompt action"
date: 2001-06-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10909
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Trade Negotiations
---

New Zealand expected the United States to remove restrictions on New Zealand and Australian lamb imports without delay, Trade Negotiations  
Minister Jim Sutton said today.

The United States has notified the World Trade Organisation that it would implement the recent WTO ruling which found United States safeguard tariffs on New Zealand lamb imports illegal, but it requested a reasonable period of time to consider its options.

Mr Sutton warned that New Zealand expects the United States, in considering its options, to respect the rules of the WTO.

"The decision was clear and comprehensive. In our view the United States has no other option but to terminate the restrictions on our lamb exports, which have been in place for almost two years now."

The WTO ruled last month that United States safeguard measures on exports of New Zealand and Australian lamb meat were illegal. The United States is permitted to determine how it will bring the measure into conformity with the rules of the WTO, and to have a reasonable period of time to do so. Exactly how long the US will have to implement the ruling will be the subject of negotiations between the United States, New Zealand, and Australia over the next few weeks.  
"Failure of the United States to implement the ruling properly and in a timely manner would leave us little option but to consider further action in the WTO to ensure full and proper implementation of the ruling," Mr Sutton said.

Under WTO rules, New Zealand is able to enforce compliance through further dispute settlement proceedings if, in New Zealand's view, the United States fails to meet its obligation of full implementation.