---
title: "Ruth Dyson to be reappointed as Minister for Disability Issues"
date: 2001-06-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10749
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark today announced that Ruth Dyson will be formally reappointed as a minister on Tuesday, 5 June.

Following her swearing-in at Government House, Ruth Dyson will resume the positions she held until her resignation as a minister last October.

As well as Minister for Disability Issues, Ruth Dyson will become Associate Minister for Accident Insurance, Associate Minister of Health and Associate Minister of Social Services and Employment.

Ruth Dyson will become a member of the Education and Health, and Social Equity Cabinet committees.

"I congratulate Ruth on her reappointment as a minister. She has already shown her considerable talents as a minister outside Cabinet, and I am confident she will continue to make an important contribution to the work of the coalition government. I know that all of those who work in the disability sectors will also welcome Ruth's reappointment."

Following Ruth Dyson's reappointment as a minister outside Cabinet, Lianne Dalziel will no longer have responsibility for Disability Issues.

"I also want to thank Lianne for the job she did as Minister for Disability Issues following Ruth Dyson's resignation," Helen Clark said.

Another Cabinet change to be announced next Tuesday is the appointment of Margaret Wilson as Minister Responsible for the Law Commission. This responsibility previously came under the Justice portfolio.

The Prime Minister also announced that Dover Samuels will appear in the new ministerial list with the title 'The Honourable'. Approval to use the title was given to him in April.

News media are welcome to attend Ruth Dyson's swearing-in at Government House. This will begin at 11 am, Tuesday, 5 June 2001.

Contact: Mark Watts, press secretary, 021 822 734