---
title: "Minister to lead Latin America trade"
date: 2001-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10948
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Trade Negotiations
---

Trade Negotiations Minister Hon Jim Sutton will lead a focused trade mission to South America, taking in the countries of Argentina, Chile and Brazil.

The focus of the trade mission, from 27 July to 11 August, is "pasture to plate" and will feature a selected group of companies representing the agritech, hortitech and food processing sectors.

Trade New Zealand offices in South America have identified significant opportunities for New Zealand companies from these sectors to develop business there.

"The trade mission will be an opportunity for New Zealand companies to show-case some of their cutting edge technology and know-how in such areas as biotechnology, animal husbandry and traceability," Mr Sutton said.

"I expect that my presence , will be able to open new and additional doors, both at the government and commercial level, for the accompanying mission members."

He said it would be an opportunity for companies in these sectors which were new to the region to explore opportunities in these burgeoning markets and for companies already doing business there to develop their relationships further with local agents and distributors.

Trade New Zealand will coordinate the mission and Mr Sutton said Trade New Zealand would assist those companies on the trade mission with a contribution towards their airfares and accommodation expenses.

There are currently 12 companies confirmed for the mission.

Although participation is by invitation, Trade New Zealand's Market Services Manager for South America William Wattie, located in Trade New Zealand's Auckland office, would welcome contact from any companies who believe they may profit from joining the mission.