---
title: "$6 million for Southern Saltmarsh Mosquito"
date: 2001-06-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10844
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Biosecurity
---

Associate Biosecurity Minister Marian Hobbs has announced funding of $6 million over four years to combat the southern saltmarsh mosquito.

The money will be used to eradicate the exotic mosquito in Napier, Gisborne, Mahia and Porongahau and to contain and control the spread of the mosquito in the Kaipara and Mangawhai areas. It will also enable enhanced disease protection measures in Auckland and Northland.

Marian Hobbs said the mosquito is a known vector of the Ross River virus.

"Although no cases have been acquired in New Zealand, there will at times be people present carrying this virus, particularly travellers returning from Australian states where this virus is endemic," Marian Hobbs said.

"We recognise this risk and providing this funding will allow us to continue the successful eradication work already underway in Napier, Gisborne, Mahia and Porongahau and to begin containment and control measures in the Kaipara and Mangawhai areas.

"In Napier, no adults have been trapped since April 2000 and no larvae detected within the 650 hectare area since August 2000. A further 16 months of surveillance remains before the mosquito can be declared eradicated from this area. This funding commitment from Vote Biosecurity/Health will ensure these gains are not lost.

"The Ministry of Health will continue to monitor progress in Napier and apply the control agent S-methoprene* to all infected sites in the Gisborne, Mahia and Porongahau regions. Experts have advised that eradication is also likely to be successful in these areas, which cover a total of 190 hectares."

Marian Hobbs said the Kaipara and Mangawhai area is substantially larger than any other incursion, covering a potential habitat of 2710 hectares and requires further work before eradication can be considered.

"Because of the size of this area, the Ministry of Health informs me that aerial application of control agents will be required," Marian Hobbs said. "This will be over swamp and timing will depend on various factors including mosquito activity and tidal conditions.

"Eradication is potentially still an option in these areas but before this is considered we need to determine how the mosquito is getting into these areas as well as review surveillance requirements and practices.

"Once this is complete, the future of all aspects of the response will be reviewed. This will involve consultation with local government and other interested parties."

The Ministry of Health will provide quarterly progress reports to the Associate Minister. It will also call tenders for a national response centre to manage the overall response.

\*S-methoprene  
S-methoprene is being used to supplement Bti, the control agent already being used. These two products have been used already in the Napier eradication programme and have undergone full health impact assessment. Bti, which is a biological spray, leaves no longterm residue and has no other impact on the environment or people. S-methoprene is an insect growth regulator that stops the mosquito pupae hatching into adults. It has been used extensively overseas to control mosquitoes. S-methoprene breaks down quickly in the environment and is believed to be environmentally safe for use in New Zealand. Studies of the effect on 'non-target' species in Hawkes Bay have shown no impact.