---
title: "Goff launches scheme to make homes safer"
date: 2001-06-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10830
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

Justice Minister Phil Goff launched a scheme today to make people's homes safer against burglars.

The Target Hardening initiative will provide people on low incomes who have been repeat victims of burglaries with security information and security equipment such as locks and alarms.

The programme is run by the New Zealand Council of Victim Support Groups and funded through Vote Justice.

"Burglary is one of the most common crimes in New Zealand and two thirds of all burglaries last year were of people's homes.

"The police have made good progress in combating the problem with the number of burglaries last year the lowest since 1982 while household burglaries dropped 14 percent between 1999 and 2000.

"This scheme is aimed at further reducing the number of burglaries and targets a group of New Zealanders such as students and beneficiaries who statistically are more likely to have their homes burgled and be repeat victims of burglary.

"Those who qualify will have locks installed on windows and doors and will be provided with advice on other measures which can make their homes safer.

"The programme will operate across Auckland initially and Victim Support intends to expand it nation-wide by the end of the year. An evaluation process of the scheme will be completed by the end of 2002.

"The scheme is part of this government's overall commitment to providing better support to victims of crime. $1.3 million has been provided over four years for the Target Hardening programme.

"This follows on from the Victims' Rights Bill which will strengthen the rights of victims of crime. Legislation to extend DNA testing to burglary suspects to be introduced this year will also aid the battle against burglars.

"Police measures are one part of the solution but this scheme is also important in helping those low income people who are repeat victims of burglary," Mr Goff said.