---
title: "$1.4m funding boost for Pacific social service providers"
date: 2001-06-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10806
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

The Government is to invest $1.4 million to provide community-based social services to Pacific Islands people.

Mr Maharey and Pacific Island Affairs Minister Mark Gosche this morning announced the establishment of two consortiums of Pacific social service organisations in Auckland. The consortiums will provide information and support services for the large and growing number of Pacific social service providers. In addition, funding is also being provided to support a large number of individual providers across the country.

Mr Maharey said the consortiums will assist Pacific social services to further develop what they know best – making a positive difference in their community.

"Strengthening the ability of community-based social service providers to develop services which meet the needs of their communities is a key ambition of this Government.

"Last year’s Budget set aside $1.37 million for a Pacific Provider Development Fund to build providers ability to work with Pacific Islands children and their families. This funding has now mostly been allocated.

"Two consortia in Auckland will receive $140,000 each to deliver to their members:  
\* information provision, support and advice;  
\* training programmes;  
\* advocacy on issues relating to Pacific social service providers and their clients and customers; and,  
\* co-ordination in the provision of Pacific social services.

"Allocating funding for the consortia delivers on a long-held ambition on the part of Pacific peoples to get more active supporting the development of their communities. Consultation initially began in 1998, but became stalled until direction from the new Government to Child, Youth and Family and complete their development.

"In addition funding worth $843,000 has also been allocated to forty-five community-based providers to support their work. The Government plans to continue this support annually as we recognise ongoing support for provider development is crucial.

"We want to keep working closely with Pacific Islands providers to help ensure they get the support they need from us in their work with the various Pacific Islands communities,” Steve Maharey said.