---
title: "Progress in implementing Gisborne recommendations"
date: 2001-06-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10907
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King says 36 of the 46 recommendations of the Gisborne Cervical Screening Inquiry Report have now been implemented, or are being implemented.

Mrs King today released the second monthly report updating progress on implementing the recommendations. "When the Inquiry report was released at a public meeting in Gisborne on April 10, I asked the Ministry to provide monthly reports charting progress on implementing the recommendations."  
In the past month, progress had been made in a number of areas, including:  
\* Proposed law changes supporting the audit of the National Cervical Screening programme, meeting a key recommendation of the Inquiry Report, were outlined in a discussion document released last week by the Ministry of Health. The document, Improving the NCSP, Law Changes to Support the Audit of the Programme, was distributed to women's organisations, health providers and professional organisations. It covers proposed changes to section 74A of the Health Act 1956. "I look forward to hearing women's views about what safeguards they want to see to protect their information while we audit the programme," Mrs King said today.

\* An internal steering group and project plan are both underway for the review of the Kaitiaki Regulations and work has started on scoping the process for review and consultation.  
\* The Cancer Audit project is progressing well and meeting key milestones. The project team is seeking a cancer epidemiology group from New Zealand or Australia to undertake the audit.  
\* Work has begun on recommendations involving changes or improvements to the Cancer Registry and National Cervical Screening Programme Register.  
\* The Ministry is starting discussions with primary care organisations including the New Zealand Medical Association and the Independent Practice Association Council to implement the quality standards for primary care as recommended by the Inquiry.

\* Ministry Project Team members have also met a number of screening and education providers and are continuing to compile information on the available workforce and current training as part of the National Screening Unit's Workforce Development Project.  
Mrs King said that she had the opportunity in England on May 18 to meet Dr Euphemia McGoogan, senior lecturer in pathology at Lothian University Hospitals. "Dr McGoogan gave evidence at the Inquiry, and will provide me with an independent evaluation after six months and one year of the Ministry's progress in implementing the recommendations. I am looking forward to her first visit here in October.

"I was also delighted that Dr McGoogan told me she would be available to do further evaluations folowing the first year if this was needed."

Mrs King said she was pleased the Ministry was continuing to make progress with implementing the recommendations, and she believed "New Zealand women can feel confident that the lessons from Gisborne are being learned," Mrs King said.