---
title: "Government funding for Cape Foulwind Walkway"
date: 2001-06-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10804
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

Tourism Minister Mark Burton today handed over a cheque for $36,000 for improvements to one of the West Coast's premier tourist attractions.

The money, which comes from the Tourism Facilities Grant Fund, will be used by the Buller Promotion and Tourism Association, in conjunction with the Department of Conservation, for further development of the walkway to the Cape Foulwind Seal colony.

A 4-kilometre walkway runs from the Lighthouse at Cape Foulwind to the seal rookery near Tauranga Bay.

The seal colony attracts an estimated 80,000 to 100,000 visitors every year and is one of the top five visited sites on the West Coast.

"Development of the walkway has been a successful cooperative effort between the Department of Conservation and the Buller Promotion and Tourism Association," Mark Burton said.

"Over the past few years there have been significant improvements to the walkway and associated facilities. The new government funding will go towards providing an all weather track. This will help ensure visitors have a quality experience.

"The Cape Foulwind walkway allows visitors to obtain excellent views of the seal colony while protecting the environment.

"This government accepts it has a responsibility to work in partnership with the regions to develop tourism in a sustainable fashion. The recently announced New Zealand Tourism Strategy was developed in that spirit of cooperation.

"The financial support for upgrading the Cape Foulwind walkway illustrates our determination to support worthy projects which come from and continue to have the strong backing of local communities," Mark Burton said.