---
title: "Education Ministers Sign Memorandum with Mäori Boarding Schools"
date: 2001-06-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10870
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Ministers Trevor Mallard and Parekura Horomia say the Memorandum of Understanding with Maori boarding schools marks a significant step in improving educational outcomes for Maori.

The Ministers and representatives of Paerangi Ltd signed the memorandum at an informal function at Parliament tonight .

Trevor Mallard said the country’s seven Maori boarding schools have a great deal to offer in lifting Maori achievement levels.

“This new agreement equips those schools to develop strategies to strengthen school and staff performance and to enhance their governance and management capability.

Parekura Horomia said the Maori boarding schools have produced many of Maoridom's great leaders including Sir Apirana Ngata, Sir Maui Pomare and Dame Mira Szasy.

"We have to continue to concentrate on developing future leaders, and these schools can play an important part in meeting that challenge".

The seven secondary Maori boarding schools who are covered by the memorandum are Hato Petera and Queen Victoria in Auckland, St. Joseph’s, Hukarere and Te Aute in Hawke’s Bay, and Turakina and Hato Paora in the Manawatu/Whanganui area.

While the schools will continue to be autonomous, a charitable company called Paerangi Ltd will promote them collectively.

Trevor Mallard and Parekura Horomia said they are looking forward to receiving recommendations from Paerangi Ltd, which will ensure the Maori boarding schools are strong and viable, on academic, cultural and economic levels. The recommendations will be contained in a business case which is due to be presented to the Ministers over the next couple of weeks.