---
title: "Royal NZ Ballet's"
date: 2001-06-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10856
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

"The Royal New Zealand Ballet's new work, FrENZy, is going to be a fantastic show," says Judith Tizard, Associate Minister of Arts, Culture and Heritage.

As the Minister responsible for the Royal NZ Ballet, Judith Tizard attended a rehearsal of "FrENZy" at the ballet's headquarters in the WestpacTrust St James Theatre this week. "FrENZy" is part of "Ihi FrENZy", two works which open in Wellington next Wednesday 13 June.

"I was delighted to see the ballet in rehearsal mode, and I was impressed by their hard work.

"More than that, as a New Zealander, I'm excited by the direction the Royal New Zealand Ballet has taken with FrENZy," says Judith Tizard. "The company is creating original New Zealand dance works set to contemporary New Zealand music.

"The music of Split Enz is an important cornerstone in New Zealand's contemporary cultural history. These sorts of collaborations play a major part in enhancing our national identity.

"After watching a rehearsal under Mark Baldwin's choreography, I am positive the full show - including the Te Matarae I Orehu kapa haka production "Ihi" - will be a success.

"As the Minister responsible for the ballet, I'm pleased with the progress it has made both creatively and financially, with the recent announcement of a financial surplus in the company's annual report.

"More and more international dance companies are touring New Zealand. While this indicates that New Zealanders are very interested in dance, it also gives us a chance to see how well our national ballet compares with those from overseas - and we are right up there.

"Ihi FrENZy is complete show: dance on an international level that is deeply immersed in traditional and contemporary New Zealand culture. I encourage as many New Zealanders as possible to see it when it comes to your city."