---
title: "Anderton welcomes proof that Industry NZ Awards help businesses"
date: 2001-06-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10900
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

18 June 2001Media Release

Anderton welcomes proof that Awards help businesses

Economic Development Minister Jim Anderton today announced the sixth round of Industry New Zealand Enterprise Awards and welcomed the news that a previous recipient is benefiting from the grant they were awarded last year.

The sixth round of Industry New Zealand Enterprise Awards has 34 recipients taking the number of grants awarded to 174 since September 2000 when the awards started.

"These awards are clearly making a difference," said Jim Anderton.

Crazy Catch, which received an Industry New Zealand Enterprise Award in November 2000 has impressed the Warriors rugby league team so much that they are getting a larger version of the Crazy Catch ball skills trainer on Thursday 21 June.

"I played with Crazy Catch in Auckland last year and it was an excellent sports and leisure device. When you throw a ball, it comes back at random angles, making it a great training device," said Jim Anderton.

"Andrew and Louise Sinclair of Auckland, in the true spirit of kiwi inventors, constructed the Crazy Catch in their backyard to stop their sons breaking their windows. It was so successful they were able to get an Enterprise Award for it and now are selling the device to a range people in different sporting codes.

"This is the sort of innovation we need to see more of and I encourage other inventors to contact Industry New Zealand to develop their ideas further," said Jim Anderton. (attached is information from Crazy Catch).

The latest round includes an interactive maze and caves for Old MacDonald's Farmyard in Auckland, a new internet search engine, development of frozen fruit desserts and market research for a company producing building componentry made from polystyrene.

Entrepreneurs or small business owners can receive a maximum of $20,000 from an Industry New Zealand Enterprise Award, which can be used to fund up to 50 percent of the cost of a project.

Small businesses and entrepreneurs interested in Enterprise Awards and other services and support from Industry New Zealand can look at the website www.industrynz.govt.nz.  
Media Inquiries: Sam Fisher \[press secretary] 021 714 209, 04 471 9289  
email: sam.fisher@parliament.govt.nz, http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/anderton/index.html or http://www.alliance.org.nz

Round 6 Enterprise Award SchemeJune 2001

Auckland  
Burns Enterprises. Rebeckh Burns, (09) 376 5707, $4,489. Market research for self development projects  
Wild Daisies Publications Ltd. Jill Mitchell, (09) 813 1132, $15,354. Develop children's books for the Korean market  
Promax Technology Ltd. Nigel King, (09) 307 1771. $9,495. Intellectual property protection, design and manufacture of prototype neck support system  
Kiwi Mazes Ltd. Colin Wells, (09) 415 5561, $ 5,000. Assist development of an interactive maze & cave  
Dave Mark Partnership. $ 6,469, Plant growth stimulant research  
Airopac Industries Ltd. Charlie Borrell, (09) 277 7900 $1,575, Market research for packaging firm  
Chances Fashion Surf & Street. Leon Jacobson, 09 297 7863, $ 7,380. Assist with expansion of retail chain  
Lautofa Iuli. (09) 846 1499, $2,652. To assist with a dry waste disposal system  
SRB Pacific. $11,257, Development & intellectual property protection for a carrier system  
Surfbrains.com Ltd Simon Angelo (09) 625 5590, $ 2,150. Optimisation of search engine  
On-line Advertising Solutions Ltd, $10,668, On-line marketing  
Cherri-Toms Ltd, John Hamilton (09) 298 1879, $4,500. Feasibility study and business plan for growing roses.  
Owltech Ltd, Rod Gates, (09) 302 3659, $1,654. Market research  
Mahanga Holdings Ltd, Ron Davey, (09) 444 0663, $ 10,000. Feasibility study into the application of fuel cells  
RMSD Ltd, Kay Madigan, (09) 419 1219. $ 7,994. Prototype design for electronic anchor winch  
Footbridge Health Ltd. Graeme Ford, director, $20,000. Prototype design & testing

WAIKATO  
Rennacs Ltd, Glenn Thornley. (07) 823 6552. $13,413. Intellectual property protection.

BAY OF PLENTY  
Stonemark Timber Products Ltd, Peter Marks, (07) 575 2530, $4,980. Development of roofing shutter system  
Echo Absorbing Art Ltd, Bob Russell. 025 741 377, $ 4,097. Product development, business planning & market research, Acoustic engineering  
Puma Dart Products Ltd, John McCormick, (07) 549 0253, $1,238. To assist with market research of sporting goods

GISBORNE  
Milly Molly Group Holdings Ltd, John Pittar, (06) 868 7769, $18,219. Assist with intellectual property protection.

MANAWATU -WANGANUI  
Powerstick, James Hill, 021 118 3492 $14,429. Assist with the development of a remote control aid.  
Western Harvest, Craig Jones, (06) 364 5030. $3,165. Develop frozen food product.

Tuff-Lite Ltd, Kevin Halsall, (06) 364 7188, $7,500. Intellectual property protection for a trailer.

WELLINGTON  
Infinet Solutions Ltd, Anton Donde, (04) 939 2263. $9,483. Develop marketing strategies & objectives for knowledge management system.  
Musacus Ltd. $20,000. Assist with a music teaching device  
Kapiti English Language Academy, Tony Gan, (04) 902 6868, $3,600. Develop a new course

CANTERBURY  
Ultra Fuels Ltd, Ross Moffatt, (03) 366 7154., $ 6,446. To assist with the development of the "Heatlog" project  
Ashford Handicrafts Ltd. Elizabeth Ashford, (03) 308 9081. $3,187. Market research  
Abretec. Philip Ivory, (03) 367 1029, $4,782. Develop prototype air filter  
G P Steel Ltd. Graham Pell, (03) 338 8441. $5,000. Development of a domestic wood pellet fire  
Long Plastics Ltd. Peter Spackman, (03) 323 8219. $2,363. Market research for polystyrene products.  
Lanowool. Lene Alexandersen, (03) 358 7619. $2,301. To assist the prototype development of breastfeeding pads

OTAGO  
CKI Ltd. $4,932, Business and financial planning

Fax:  
From:Andrew & Louise Sinclair  
Crazy Catch  
Ph 09 2363 540  
Fax09 2363 647  
Emailcrazycatch@xtra.co.nz

The "Big" Crazy Catch Launch

The Kiwi home grown Crazy Catch has developed a new unique sports product. Following on from the success of the cricket Crazy Catch version, (a unique ball rebound net with an unpredictable feature), the first prototype of the "Big" Crazy Catch has been developed for the NZ Warriors. There is a media demonstration day, planned for:  
路 Thursday June 21  
路 1.00 - 1.30pm.  
路 At the Ericsson Stadium, Beazley Ave.  
路 A sign will indicate which field the Warriors are training on, (or indoors if it is very wet).

The NZ Warriors will be training and players will be using the "Big" Crazy Catch. Daniel Anderson and some players will be available for comment. Andrew & Louise Sinclair (kiwi inventors of Crazy Catch) will be present along with other people involved with the manufacture of Crazy Catch.

We will send a media information pack to you by Tuesday next week.

We look forward to meeting you there and please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any queries.

Regards

Andrew & Louise Sinclair