---
title: "Film & Literature Board of Review appointments"
date: 2001-06-25
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10977
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Internal Affairs
---

The Internal Affairs Minister, George Hawkins has today announced eight new appointments, and one reappointment to the Film and Literature Board of Review.

"The Board of Review has a very important and at times difficult role to play" said Mr Hawkins. "It is responsible for reviewing the classifications placed on a wide range of printed and visual material, and in making these appointments I was looking for a wide range of skills and experience".

"Between them the nine individuals who now make up the Board have extensive legal and business experience, academic and practical knowledge of the media, and different cultural backgrounds.

"The diversity on the Board is something I am particularly pleased about. We have lawyers, people actively teaching and working in the media, a scientist and a former journalist to name a few! We also have members of Pacific Island, and Maori descent, who will bring unique perspectives to the operation of the Board.

"I want to take this opportunity to thank the outgoing Board members who have contributed a great deal since they were appointed in 1995, and welcome the new appointees who I am sure I will enjoy working with over the next three years" said Mr Hawkins.

Note: Biographical details of Board members are attached.

Film and Literature Board of Review

Re-appointed Member (one year term from 23/5/01)  
Pamela Meekings-Stewart  
Ms Meekings-Stewart is based in Wellington. She has a degree in economics and commercial law and has wide-ranging media experience.

New Appointments (three year term from 1/6/01)

Claudia Elliot (President)  
Ms Elliot is a Partner in a Rotorua law firm. She is an experienced legal professional specialising in family, mental health and employment law, and is a youth advocate.

Greg Presland (Deputy President)  
Mr Presland practises as Barrister and Solicitor in Auckland. He serves on a number of subcommittees of the Auckland District Law Society and has extensive experience in Criminal law.

Mark Andersen  
Mr Anderson is a Scientist at HortResearch in Auckland. He has a strong interest in film and literature.

Stephen Stehlin  
Mr Stehlin is of Samoan descent and lives in Auckland. He is the producer of Tagata Pasifika, and has a wide range of experience in Maori and Pacific Island television programmes.

Marion Orme  
Ms Orme works as lecturer in Literature, Film and Drama at Massey University College of Education. She has wide-ranging interests in film, literature, theatre and education.

Peter Cartwright  
Mr Cartwright is Wellington-based. He is Chair of the Broadcasting Standards Authority and has extensive legal experience. Mr Cartwright was Chair of the Indecent Publications Tribunal from 1990 to 1994.

Dr Brian McDonnell  
Dr McDonnell is of Tuhoe descent. He is a Senior Lecturer in English and Media Studies at Massey University (Albany Campus). Dr McDonnell has extensive experience in film and television studies.

Dr Lalita Rajasingham  
Dr Rajasingham is Senior Lecturer in Communication Studies at Victoria University of Wellington. She is a former television and radio journalist and is fluent in a variety of languages.