---
title: "Aid doubles for East Timor"
date: 2001-06-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10792
ministers:
  - Matt Robson
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

New Zealand will provide an additional $1.9 million to support East Timor's continuing reconstruction, Associate Foreign Affairs and Trade Minister Matt Robson announced today.

The increased funding from New Zealand's Official Development Assistance Programme (NZODA) was announced following his meeting with East Timor Cabinet Member for Foreign Affairs Dr Jose Ramos Horta.

The funding announced today includes:  
\* $250,000 to support the forthcoming constituent assembly election and $200,000 to the United Nations Development Programme for public sector strengthening.  
\* $116,000 to Vounteer Service Abroad for an East Timor VSA programme.  
\* $200,000 to support World Bank Trust Fund for East Timor programmes in core sectors such as health education, agriculture, community empowerment and infrastructure.  
\* $515,000 to the Consolidated Fund for East Timor to support the operational budget of the East Timor Transitional Administration.

"As independence and self-government approaches, East Timor's need for New Zealand and wider international assistance is enormous," Matt Robson said.

"New Zealand continues to contribute to the UN's peacekeeping force. Assistance is being provided to re-establish core government functions including customs, police, corrections, justice, education and foreign affairs. Support is also being given through NZODA to the export sector to provide organic certification for East Timor's coffee.

"We're also helping with projects such as the re-establishment of an independent newspaper, the re-roofing of the Salele marketplace, the establishment of a TB clinic in Suai, and a joint project with the UK to provide a ferry service to the people of Atauro Island."

New Zealand will spend a total of $3.9 million this financial year in Official Development Assistance through the East Timor bilateral programme.