---
title: "Regional breakdown of extra money for palliative care"
date: 2001-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10949
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King says regional distribution of the extra $7.5 million provided for palliative care brings closer the day when every dying person will have access to at least one palliative care service.

Mrs King today released the regional breakdown of the extra funding, which has been provided as part of the Palliative Care Strategy she launched on February 14.

"The purpose of the strategy and the funding is to introduce consistent access  
to palliative care services and consistent quality, to reduce the duplication of services and increase coordination.

"One of the first priorities is to ensure that essential services are available to all dying people. The strategy sets out a number of plans that will be progressively implemented over the next five to ten years.

"Palliative care is for people who are dying from cancer and a range of other diseases such as chronic obstructive disease and neurone disease. This extra money will better enable hospices and/or other palliative care services in the regions to provide quality care services.

"The palliative care sector has been traditionally underfunded, but this is now being adressed."

Mrs King said a total of $21.2 million funding was now provided to hospices in New Zealand per year. and additional funding worth approximately $5 million was also provided through hospitals for community nursing palliative care services.

"The extra funding recognises the high level of service provided by hospices and other palliative care services by committed staff, and a high volume of volunteer work."