---
title: "Maharey confirms funding for fostercare training"
date: 2001-06-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10833
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

The Government has confirmed ongoing funding to provide quality training for foster caregivers, Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey announced this evening.

The announcement was made at a meeting of the executive of the New Zealand Family and Foster Care Federation.

A pilot caregiver training programme run by the New Zealand Family and Foster Care Federation and Child, Youth and Family has operated this year. Funding was due to cease in June 2002. The programme has received positive feedback from the approximately 900 caregivers who have taken part in the training so far.

“This funding means we will be able to continue in-depth training to Department caregivers, as well as people from other agencies and iwi groups in rural and urban areas

"The cost of running the course per year is just over $400,000, with about a thousand caregivers expected to benefit from the programme in the next 12 months. The programme is pitched at an advanced level and includes topics like behaviour management, family dynamics and understanding maltreatment.

"When I attended the April conference of the Family and Foster Care Federation I affirmed the crucial role caregivers play looking after some of the country’s neediest children and young people and acknowledged the unique challenges they and their families face. The Family and the Fostercare Federation programme is important because it equips caregivers to perform this role.

“Confirmed funding for the programme also cements in what has become a close partnership between Child, Youth and Family and the Fostercare Federation. This partnership is important if we are to develop the best possible training that will meet their needs," Steve Maharey said.