---
title: "CFYS look to Puao te ata-tu vision"
date: 2001-06-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10860
ministers:
  - Tariana Turia
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Puao te ata-tu has lived on in the hearts and minds of Maori whanau, hapu and iwi says Associate Social Services and Employment Minister Tariana Turia.

In a speech to the Puao te ata-tu conference held by CYFS Maori staff at Turangawaewae Marae today the Minister affirmed her support for the Puao te ata tu document, which has been 'owned' by Maori people and is probably why Maori have continued to make reference to it over the last 15 years.

"Puao te ata-tu emphasised in 1986, a return to the principles and practices of having our tamariki and mokopuna returned from stranger and institutional care to be cared for by whanau.

There was also a focus on the continued development of Maori CYFS staff especially in working with whanau.

"To enable the best service to be given we need the best workers to be avaliable to deliver the service. It is important for workers to be skilled in working with the issues which confront whanau and knowledgeable about the whanau who they work with.

"While I believe 'clinical' skills and knowledge are important I also believe that each person's values, beliefs and attitudes need to be examined.

"We must set ourselves specific targets to strive toward. Reduce the number of Maori children in stranger care, stop children from being placed with strangers and ensure that whanau, hapu and iwi are properly funded to enable them to care for those with whom they are genealogically connected.

"Puao te ata tu will be implemented by this government," Tariana Turia said.