---
title: "Govt offers certainty on superannuation"
date: 2001-06-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10798
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

"The only parties putting up a workable proposal to help pay for superannuation for greatly increased numbers of older people in the future are Labour and the Alliance," Prime Minister Helen Clark said today.

Helen Clark was speaking to a Grey Power audience in Tauranga this morning.

"I am disappointed that the Greens have decided to vote against the proposed New Zealand Superannuation Fund, especially as they have no credible alternative to offer.

"If the government cannot get a majority in this Parliament for its superannuation policy, we will make it a central issue in the 2002 election campaign.

"After so many years of broken promises, New Zealanders are crying out for a long-term plan for superannuation. New Zealanders want certainty about superannuation and the Labour/Alliance Government wants to deliver that certainty.

"In the last election Labour campaigned strongly and openly on the need for a dedicated superannuation fund, enabling older people to live in dignity. The legislation presently before Parliament delivers on our pledge.

"Soon after coming into office the government also kept its pre-election promise to restore the relativity of superannuation to the average wage after National had cut it.

"We have done our best to accept input from other parties about the proposed Superannuation Fund.

"We share the Greens' concern that the Fund not participate in unethical investment. That is why the legislation requires that the Guardians of the Fund must invest in a manner consistent with avoiding prejudice to New Zealand's reputation as a responsible member of the world community.

"Finance Minister Michael Cullen will meet with Winston Peters again over the next couple of weeks to discuss his views on the Fund.

"Money has already been set aside for the ringfenced Fund. The legislation is needed to secure the ringfencing and begin a long term investment programme. If there is not support for the legislation in this Parliament, then Labour and the Alliance will seek a clear mandate for it in the next," Helen Clark said.