---
title: "Winners of Rio+10 children’s art competition"
date: 2001-06-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10812
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Environment Minister, Marian Hobbs, has announced winners of the Rio+10 children's art competition, coinciding with World Environment Day (June 5). The competition sought children’s views of our environment.

"The competition attracted more than 650 entries from around the country," Marian Hobbs said. "We were delighted with the colourful, attractive and thoughtful entries we received from so many young people."

The competition, run by the Ministry for the Environment, was in two sections: a junior section for children five to eight years old, and an intermediate section for children 9 years and older.

"A stunningly creative entry called The Spirit of New Zealand won the intermediate section for 11 year-old Lauren Rowland, from Stratford Primary School, Taranaki," Marian Hobbs said. "Lauren said she got her inspiration from the beautiful shapes and forms of Maori jade sculpture. She combined water and living things with the landscape and the beautiful colours of nature in a painting that attracted attention from the moment it arrived.

"Six-year old Ben Pepeko, from Waipawa Primary School, Hawkes Bay, had good food as well as nature on his mind. Ben won the junior section with a wool and watercolour picture called Plenty of Kina. The school says that Ben likes drawing and colouring in, and he loves eating kina. He created his picture after the whole school had been out to visit the Te Angiangi Marine Reserve."

The art competition for primary and intermediate school students is part of the Ministry for the Environment’s Rio+10 programme, which is seeking community input on the environment in preparation for next year’s World Summit on Sustainable Development.

The winners of the competition will receive $50 each and each school will receive $500 to help in improving their environment. A second prize of $25 to the artist and $250 to the school, and a third prize of $15 for the artist and $150 for the school has been awarded in each section.

The prizewinners were:

9 years and over

1 Lauren Rowland, 11 years old, Stratford Primary School, Taranaki  
The Spirit of New Zealand

2 Danielle O’Leary, 11 years old, Gisborne Intermediate School, Gisborne  
The Road to a Better World

3Kendyl Morris, 9 years old, Te Awamutu Primary School, Te Awamutu  
Takahe the Seeker

5-8 years

1Ben Pekepo, 6 years old, Waipawa School, Hawkes Bay  
Plenty of kina

2Joel Claydon, 7 years old, Te Awamutu Primary School, Te Awamutu  
New Zealand Swamp Birds

3=Rosa Pettinger, 8 years old, Calton Hill Primary School, Dunedin  
My safe playground in the trees by the sea

3=Maria Tims, 6 years old, Hukanu School, Hamilton  
If the streams are clean we are happy

All the competition entries can be viewed in the NatureSpace Discovery Centre at Te Papa over the next month. The leading entries are displayed on the wall, while other entries are in a set of 17 display folders grouped according to region.

"Later, we hope to make the pictures available for display in the regions from which they came," the Minister said.