---
title: "Business Roundtable behind negative ad campaign"
date: 2000-10-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/business-roundtable-behind-negative-ad-campaign
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Unassigned Portfolio
---

The Business Roundtable is behind an anti-Government advertising campaign due to be launched shortly, Cabinet Minister Pete Hodgson revealed today.

Mr Hodgson released an e-mail showing that Business Roundtable executive director Roger Kerr instigated efforts by an Auckland businessman to seek the signatures of young New Zealanders overseas for newspaper advertisements criticising the Government.

The e-mail to young expatriate New Zealanders from Aucklander Richard Poole asks them to volunteer their names for full-page newspaper advertisements saying they don't want to come back to New Zealand.

Mr Poole, who wrote a letter earlier this year to Prime Minister Helen Clark criticising Government policies, wrote in his e-mail that:

"Roger Kerr … would like to use this letter to Helen Clark as a catalyst for a newspaper ad …. What the Roundtable would like to promote is an ad with excerpts of the letter, together with names/occupations and current cities of people who feel the same and want something done."

And that:

"With business backing and sponsorship as well as some assistance from other business organisations and their PR companies, they hope to pay for much of the full page ads in major dailies."

Mr Hodgson said he believed New Zealanders were tired of the endless negative publicity about their country being generated by the Business Roundtable.

"The Roundtable's devotion to badmouthing New Zealand's prospects makes it the hypochondriac of public debate in this country. It is a pity to see it enlisting young expatriate New Zealanders for its whinging campaign of misery."

Mr Hodgson said there had always been young New Zealanders abroad who would say they were never coming home. Equally there were young New Zealanders abroad with every intention of returning.

"Mr Poole's e-mail was forwarded to us by a young expat Kiwi who received it from expat Kiwi friends appalled by it. The Roundtable could set out to contact young expats like these, who look forward to coming home, but naturally it has no interest in anyone with a positive view of New Zealand.

"I am writing to Mr Kerr expressing my disappointment with his efforts and pointing out some facts about migration to balance the claims about talent flight that he is so keen to promote. I will also remind him that the Government campaigned openly on the policies he dislikes, and won a general election with them.

"As for Mr Poole, I am sure he is sincere in his views. However I think it is unfortunate that when questioned on tonight's Holmes show he was not prepared to acknowledge the full story about his campaign."