---
title: "Wise Up."
date: 2003-10-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/wise-1
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Wise Up. A newsletter from the office of Trevor Mallard, Minister of Education

Issue #56  
31 October 2003

CONTENTS

Minister's introduction  
Project probe moves into four more regions  
200 plus schools join ICT programme  
Student loan help to attract more teachers  
Extra $8.6 million to get kids back into learning  
TV campaign to attract early childhood teachers  
Education mission to central Europe  
Middle East education delegations visit New Zealand  
New school for Flat Bush  
ICT survey in schools  
Scheme for at-risk teenagers  
Big response to tertiary innovation and e-learning funds

MINISTER'S INTRODUCTION

I understand that there is concern in some communities in relation to future announcements about the next round of school area reviews. I would like to clarify my intentions in relation to future school area reviews.

It is not my intention to announce any area reviews before June next year (2004). At that time I will examine local demographics and other relevant information prior to making any further decisions.

In the meantime, if boards initiate merger and agree to merge I will consider their applications on a case-by-case basis. In these instances the extra funding available in planned area reviews will be available to the schools – ie Education Development Initiative (EDI) funding, Joint School Initiative Funding (JSIF) and property funding.

It should be noted that if schools not involved in area reviews close because of falling rolls, EDI funding will not be available.

School reviews are first and foremost about making sure local children continue to receive quality education that is sustainable well into the future.

The reasons for choosing to review a particular cluster of schools vary depending on the local situation. Any issue that presents a risk to providing quality education that could be resolved or partly resolved by a re-organisation could indicate the need for a review.

Situations that may generate a network review are:  
·Suggestions for change from one or more schools;  
·Resources not being fully utilised;  
·Falling rolls;  
·A significant number of small schools in close proximity;  
·Concerns over the quality of education being provided;  
·A desire to find more effective ways of meeting the diversity of student needs; and  
·In some instances growing rolls could generate a network review, to decide which combination of schools best meets the needs of a growing population.

Trevor Mallard

Minister of Education

PROJECT PROBE MOVES INTO FOUR MORE REGIONS

High speed internet access is about to move into four more regions as part of Project Probe, Economic Development Minister Jim Anderton, Education Minister Trevor Mallard, and Information Technology Minister Paul Swain announced.

Project Probe is a multi-million dollar government initiative, aimed at boosting education and economic development in regional New Zealand through the delivery of broadband technology.

The ministers today named ThePacific.net as preferred supplier for the delivery of broadband into the Nelson, Tasman and Marlborough region, Woosh Wireless as the preferred supplier in Canterbury, and Telecom as the preferred supplier in the Bay of Plenty and Gisborne/Hawkes Bay regions.

"Project Probe is a critical infrastructure investment to ensure students and families, businesspeople and employees will have the same opportunities in education and in economic development, regardless of where they live and work," Trevor Mallard said.

See www.probe.govt.nz for more information.

200 PLUS SCHOOLS JOIN ICT PROGRAMME

The use of information and communications technology (ICT) in classrooms is being given another significant push with the addition of an extra 246 schools into a nationwide professional development programme, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced.

By the end of this year there will be 40 clusters of schools joining the existing 43 clusters already on the national programme for professional development. The number of schools involved in the programme since it began now totals 1044, or about forty per cent of schools.

“This programme is benefiting thousands of students as their teachers, through the ICT clusters, become skilled at and confident with using this technology in the classroom. It’s a major investment by the government, worth $9.8 million in the next financial year,” Trevor Mallard said.

“Our government is deliberately focussing on information communications technology as one of the keys to growing a more innovative economy. Ensuring our students are equipped with 21st century skills is a top priority for our work in education, as it has become an important and very successful tool for students’ learning."

The clusters of schools represent a range of geographical and socio-economic locations throughout the country. Each cluster will have $120,000 available each year to support ICT professional development activities.

STUDENT LOAN HELP TO ATTRACT MORE TEACHERS

Student loan help totalling an extra $4.7 million over four years will be available for new secondary teachers in subjects where more teachers are needed, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced.

“This new initiative is part of an extra $22 million going into a package of teacher supply initiatives over the next four years, bringing total funding in this area to about $66 million,” Trevor Mallard said.

“The package represents a comprehensive and coordinated response to meeting the increasing demand for secondary teachers we are anticipating over the next few years.

“Ensuring a good supply of quality teachers is absolutely critical to advancing our government’s education priorities of building an education system that equips New Zealanders with 21st century skills, and reducing underachievement.

“Secondary teachers of maths, te reo Maori and physics will receive a payment of $2500 each year in their second to fourth years of teaching to go towards repaying their student loans. Teachers in hard-to-staff areas who teach English, chemistry, physical education, computing and biology will also be eligible for these payments.

"New teachers who meet the criteria and do not have student loans will also be eligible for these payments,” Trevor Mallard said.

EXTRA $8.6 MILLION TO GET KIDS BACK INTO LEARNING

The government is spending an extra $8.6 million over the next four years on existing and new initiatives to make sure students stay engaged in learning, and to reduce the level of truancy, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced.

"These new initiatives are designed to support schools and encourage disengaged students back into learning. They will be carried out at local levels to best meet the needs of schools and their students," Trevor Mallard said.

"The new work will also build on the highly successful Suspensions Reduction Initiative by setting targets for reducing truancy and early leaving exemptions, and for getting alienated students back into school sooner.

"I am confident the new initiatives announced today will continue to reduce suspensions, truancy and unwarranted absenteeism at school so all our students are actively engaged in education."

TV CAMPAIGN TO ATTRACT EARLY CHILDHOOD TEACHERS

A national television campaign to increase the number of qualified and registered early childhood teachers started on Sunday 19 October 2003, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced.

“This is the first campaign to specifically encourage people to become early childhood teachers and marks a milestone in the history of the early childhood sector,” Trevor Mallard said.

“The campaign demonstrates our government’s ongoing commitment to implementing Pathways to the Future: Ngä Huarahi Arataki, a 10-year strategic plan for early childhood education."

EDUCATION MISSION TO CENTRAL EUROPE

Education Minister Trevor Mallard recently took an education mission to central Europe, accompanied by a delegation of education sector representatives.

The education mission encompassed Prague, Budapest, Warsaw, Brussels and focused on broadening international relations and developing New Zealand's export education industry. It included discussions on education reform in higher education, including New Zealand's education reforms.

Trevor Mallard then attended the 15th Commonwealth Education Ministers' conference in Edinburgh the following week.

MIDDLE EAST DELEGATIONS VISIT NEW ZEALAND

Education Minister Trevor Mallard met last month with Her Excellency Dr Rawya Al Busaidi, Undersecretary for Education of the Higher Education Ministry in Oman and also met with an education delegation from Saudi Arabia, led by His Excellency Dr Ali Al Ghafis, Governor of the General Organisation for Technical Education and Vocational Training (GOTEVOT).

“I am extremely pleased that Drs Al Busaidi and Al Ghafis took up an invitation to lead education delegations to New Zealand. This visit represents further development of close education ties between our countries,” Trevor Mallard said.

"New Zealand is well-regarded throughout the Gulf region as a provider of quality education services and a number of New Zealand universities already host students from Saudi Arabia, Oman and other Gulf countries."

NEW SCHOOL FOR FLAT BUSH

A new state primary school will be established at Baverstock Road, in Flat Bush, South Auckland, to meet projected population growth, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced.

The school is scheduled to open at the beginning of 2005. The decision to establish a new primary school, for students from new entrants to year 8, follows consultation with existing schools and the local community.

"I have indicated that the school will almost certainly become a Year 1-6 contributing school as further schools are opened in the area," Trevor Mallard said.

"I'd like to thank all parents, the boards of trustees and members of the Flat Bush community who participated in the consultation process. I have carefully considered all your views and hope the establishment of this school will be welcomed by parents in the region."

ICT SURVEY IN SCHOOLS

A report out last month, 'ICT in Schools', has found that ICT is making a difference to quality teaching and learning for students, with two thirds of school principals reporting that it is resulting in major improvements to the quality of curriculum delivery in schools.

The 'ICT in Schools' report, commissioned by the Learning Centre Trust of New Zealand is available online at http://www.learningcentretrust.org.nz/activities.htm.

SCHEME FOR AT-RISK TEENAGERS

A new scheme to help at-risk young people get in to employment or further training was launched in Palmerston North by Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey.

The $290,000 Youth Pathways: He Ara Rangatahi programme is being piloted in Palmerston North, Christchurch and Napier.

The programmes are being run by Career Services rapuara and focus on young people who have left school, are too young to qualify for welfare assistance, and who are considered ‘at-risk’ because they have no concrete plans to enter further education or employment.

Thirty young people will participate in a support transition programme for 6-9 weeks. They will receive one-on-one guidance from a qualified career consultant to set clear, well-informed career goals and coaching to ensure they follow their career plans.

Steve Maharey said the pilot Youth Pathways: He Ara Rangatahi programmes are part of the $56 million plan to get all young people into education, training, work or other options by 2007.

BIG RESPONSE TO TERTIARY INNOVATION AND E-LEARNING FUNDS

Two hundred and seventy applications have been received for a share of the $34 million the government is investing in the transformation of tertiary education organisations and the development of e-learning capability.

The contestable $20 million Innovation and Development Fund (IDF) and $14 million e-Learning Collaborative Development Fund (eCDF) have been established to improve the connectedness of tertiary education organisations with the needs of business and the community, and to foster the use of technology-based learning tools.

Both capital and operational funding is available for projects to be undertaken during the period 1 January 2004 to 30 June 2005.

Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey said the funding shows the government’s commitment to achieving the goals set out in the Tertiary Education Strategy.