---
title: "JOINT STATEMENT ON AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND FOREIGN AND DEFENCE MINISTERIAL CONSULTATIONS (ANZMIN) DECEMBER 2024"
date: 2024-12-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/joint-statement-australia-new-zealand-foreign-and-defence-ministerial-consultations-anzmin
ministers:
  - Hon Judith Collins KC
  - Rt Hon Winston Peters
portfolios:
  - Defence
  - Foreign Affairs
attachments:
  - https://www.beehive.govt.nz/sites/default/files/2024-12/CDR%20FINAL-%20Dec%202024.pdf
---

1. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Rt Hon Winston Peters MP and Minister of Defence Hon Judith Collins KC MP hosted Australian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence the Hon Richard Marles MP and Minister for Foreign Affairs Senator the Hon Penny Wong on 6 December in Auckland for the second Australia – New Zealand Foreign and Defence Ministerial Consultations (ANZMIN). Ministers also met separately for a Foreign Ministers’ Meeting and a Defence Ministers’ Meeting.

#### **The Australia-New Zealand Alliance**

2. Ministers acknowledged the strength of strategic alignment that characterises the trans-Tasman partnership, as family, neighbours, and formal allies. They reaffirmed that in the face of growing geostrategic challenges, Australia and New Zealand remained steadfast in their commitment to act together as allies to safeguard national interests and advance peace, stability and prosperity in the region and beyond.  Ministers reiterated their commitment to the Australia-New Zealand alliance, underpinned by the 1951 ANZUS Treaty. Ministers noted the value of ANZMIN as an important element of the bilateral architecture, supporting Australia and New Zealand’s ability to harness all tools of statecraft to respond to the sharpening challenges presented by the most complex and challenging strategic environment in decades.
3. Defence Ministers signed the updated Australia-New Zealand Joint Statement on Closer Defence Relations (CDR), setting out contemporary objectives for our bilateral defence relationship. The CDR reaffirms Ministers’ commitment to modernising the Australia-New Zealand alliance, strengthening defence cooperation and to an increasingly integrated ‘Anzac’ force.

#### **Partnering in the Pacific**

04. Recognising that the peace and prosperity of all countries and territories in the Pacific are interconnected, Ministers reaffirmed their deep commitment to working in partnership with our fellow Pacific countries. Ministers reiterated their ongoing support for Pacific-led architecture, with the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) at the heart of Pacific regionalism. As fellow founding members of the PIF, they recognised Australia and New Zealand’s roles in contributing to a stronger Pacific family, upholding common values and norms, and to advancing the Pacific’s priorities set out in Pacific Leaders’ 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent and its Implementation Plan. They underscored the importance of supporting the PIF Chair and the principle of engaging on issues through talanoa. They welcomed Samoa’s successful hosting of a uniquely Pacific Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in October, with support from New Zealand and Australia.
05. Ministers recognised that climate change remained the single greatest threat to Pacific countries. Australia and New Zealand were committed to amplifying Pacific voices and to working in close alignment in response to climate change impacts. Ministers reiterated support for the Pacific Resilience Facility as a Pacific-led solution, to which Australia and New Zealand had pledged significant contributions. New Zealand reaffirmed its strong support for Australia’s bid to host COP31 in 2026 in partnership with the Pacific.
06. Ministers noted their enduring commitment to provide humanitarian assistance to the Pacific in response to disasters. They discussed Australia and New Zealand’s aligned approach to humanitarian and disaster relief in the Pacific, and reaffirmed the importance of cooperating closely and supporting Pacific-led responses to humanitarian crises. They acknowledged the importance of the region working together on these challenges, including through the sharing of expertise across Pacific civilian agencies and Pacific militaries. Ministers agreed the Pacific Response Group, as endorsed at this year’s South Pacific Defence Ministers’ Meeting, would be a valuable regional asset to support effective responses to disasters.
07. Ministers recognised the long history of Pacific-led approaches to peace and security challenges, noting Pacific Leaders had affirmed that the region had the will and capability to address shared security concerns from within. States from outside the region should engage in the Pacific in ways that respect and strengthen regional norms and institutions and respond to Pacific priorities. They recognised the importance of enhancing cooperation, including through regional security architecture such as the South Pacific Defence Ministers’ Meeting. Ministers agreed to continue to work together with Pacific countries to strengthen regional security meetings as an avenue to advance regional priorities. They also looked forward to progressing implementation of the Pacific Policing Initiative, as endorsed by PIF Leaders in August.
08. Ministers noted with concern China’s recent testing of an Intercontinental Ballistic Missile terminating within the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone, conducted without adequate advanced notice to all countries affected in line with best practice. Ministers reiterated their expectations, and those of Pacific Leaders, that the region remain peaceful, stable, prosperous and secure.
09. Ministers underscored Australia and New Zealand’s commitment to infrastructure investment in line with the Pacific Quality Infrastructure Principles and recognised our significant shared investments estimated at AUD150 million. They agreed that Australia and New Zealand would continue to engage with the World Bank and Asian Development Bank to advance transparent, responsive and high-quality development, in line with the Pacific Quality Infrastructure Principles, including value-for-money procurement processes and providing opportunities for local participation, skills development and employment. Ministers highlighted Australia and New Zealand’s joint support to expand vital undersea telecommunication cable connectivity in the region, with new connections to Tuvalu and Tonga scheduled to be ready for service in 2025.
10. Ministers welcomed the increased focus on ensuring a resilient and stable Pacific banking system. They reflected that the Pacific Banking Forum in July and the Pacific Banking Forum Roundtable in October had built consensus on the actions required to bolster banking services across the region, including through the forthcoming World Bank Pacific Strengthening Correspondent Banking Relationships Project.

#### **The Indo-Pacific region**

11. Ministers reaffirmed Australia and New Zealand’s firm commitment, including through working with other partners, to support a peaceful, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific, where sovereignty is respected, and internationally agreed rules and norms are adhered to.  They agreed Australian and New Zealand defence forces would continue to lift their cooperation to advance common interests in the Indo-Pacific region, including to uphold the international rules-based system.
12. Ministers committed to continue to work together to support, and lift engagement with, Southeast Asia, as an integral part of the Indo-Pacific. Ministers agreed to continue to coordinate on economic engagement and trade diversification in Southeast Asia including through Australia’s work to implement its Southeast Asia Economic Strategy and New Zealand's commitment to step up and deepen engagement with Southeast Asia. Ministers looked forward to the entry into force of the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA) Upgrade which would empower traders with new rules to grow services, investment and digital trade.
13. Ministers highlighted the central role played by ASEAN in shaping a stable, peaceful, prosperous and rules-based region. Ministers reaffirmed their support for ASEAN centrality and the ASEAN-led architecture, and underlined their commitment to the principles outlined in the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific and their practical implementation.
14. Ministers welcomed the Quad’s commitment to an open, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific and the practical contribution the Quad was making to issues of importance to the countries of the region. They agreed Australia would continue to engage close partners, including New Zealand, to ensure efforts were mutually reinforcing and complementary.
15. Ministers expressed serious concern over developments in the South China Sea and the intensification of destabilising activities. This included the militarisation of disputed features, interference with the exercise of rights and freedoms afforded states under UNCLOS, and instances of unsafe and unprofessional behaviour by China’s military, coast guard vessels and maritime militia, including towards the Philippines. Ministers also expressed serious concerns about the situation in the East China Sea.
16. Ministers emphasised the obligation of all states to adhere to international law, particularly the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. They underscored the fundamental importance of the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with international law and reiterated that the 2016 South China Sea Arbitral Award is final and binding on the parties. Ministers reaffirmed their shared commitment to promoting stability and security in the region's vital international waterways and to continuing to work with Indo-Pacific partners to build capability and strengthen interoperability, including through Multilateral Maritime Cooperation Activities.
17. Ministers reaffirmed the importance of peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait and their shared opposition to unilateral changes to the status quo. They called for the peaceful resolution of cross-Strait issues through dialogue without the threat or use of force or coercion. They also reiterated their will to continue deepening relations with Taiwan in the economic, trade, and cultural fields as well as enhancing development coordination in the Pacific.
18. Ministers reiterated their deep concern at the escalating violence and deepening humanitarian crisis in Myanmar. They reaffirmed Australia and New Zealand’s commitment to supporting the people of Myanmar’s desire for a return to an inclusive democracy. Ministers strongly condemned the regime’s violent repression of its people, including the continued bombardment of civilian infrastructure. They reiterated calls on the regime to immediately cease violence, release those arbitrarily detained, allow safe and unimpeded humanitarian access, and to return Myanmar to the path of inclusive democracy through genuine and inclusive dialogue. Ministers reaffirmed their full support for ASEAN’s central role in finding a peaceful resolution to the crisis, including through the work of the ASEAN Chair and Special Envoy, consistent with the Five-Point Consensus. They also reaffirmed the important role of the UN, including the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Myanmar, and the international community.
19. Ministers strongly condemned North Korea’s development of nuclear weapons and ballistic missile technology and reaffirmed their commitment to the complete denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula, consistent with UNSC resolutions. They urged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) to comply with its obligations under UNSC resolutions.
20. Ministers underscored the importance of continued dialogue between the United States and China, including as a means of responsibly managing strategic competition. They reemphasised the importance of promoting open channels of communication, transparency, and practical measures to reduce risks of misunderstanding, miscalculation, escalation and conflict in our region.
21. Ministers affirmed the importance of partnerships contributing to regional security and stability, including the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) and AUKUS. They also welcomed further cooperation between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) member states and its Indo-Pacific Partners (IP4), and agreed that the Five Eyes partnership remained a vital part of the shared security architecture.
22. Ministers acknowledged Australia’s commitment to responsible nuclear stewardship and the highest non-proliferation standard in relation to its acquisition of conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered submarines. The Ministers also welcomed the AUKUS partners’ ongoing engagement with the International Atomic Energy Agency. The Ministers noted consultations were continuing on opportunities for collaboration on advanced non-nuclear capabilities under AUKUS Pillar II.
23. Ministers expressed grave concerns about human rights violations in Xinjiang, and about the erosion of religious, cultural and linguistic rights and freedoms in Tibet. They also shared grave concerns about the continuing systemic erosion of Hong Kong’s autonomy, freedom, rights and democratic processes, including through the imposition of national security legislation.

#### **Collaborating to address global challenges**

24. Ministers reaffirmed Australia and New Zealand’s commitment to multilateralism and the rules-based international system, as fundamental underpinnings of peace, security and prosperity in an increasingly complex and disrupted world. They emphasised their opposition to economic coercion in all its forms and recognised the importance of multilateral institutions and norms that promote free, fair, and open international trade.
25. Ministers highlighted Australia and New Zealand’s shared commitment to the Paris Agreement and underlined that a rapid and effective global response to climate change was needed in this critical decade. To this end, they welcomed the ambitious and comprehensive outcomes of the second Australia-New Zealand Climate and Finance Ministers’ Meeting in July.
26. Ministers noted Australia and New Zealand had a long history of cooperation on Antarctica and Southern Ocean issues. They remained firmly focused on strengthening the Antarctic Treaty System, which protects Antarctica as a natural reserve for peace and science. Upholding the principles of the Antarctic Treaty together and working with others, was more important than ever.
27. Ministers welcomed the announcement of a ceasefire in Lebanon and acknowledged the efforts of the parties involved in the negotiations. Ministers called for the terms of the agreement to be implemented fully in order to break the cycle of violence and enable displaced civilians to return to their homes on both sides of the border.
28. Ministers noted that the breakthrough in Lebanon demonstrates the value of diplomacy and called on parties to uphold the ceasefire. Ministers underscored the importance of de-escalation in the region and a ceasefire in Gaza. They remained unequivocal in their condemnation of Hamas and the taking of hostages, and called for Hamas to release all remaining hostages immediately. They respected Israel’s right to defend itself, but noted the right of self-defence was not unconstrained and needed to comply with international law, including international humanitarian law. Ministers expressed alarm at the humanitarian situation in Gaza and called on Israel to do more to enable safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. They underlined that civilians, as well as humanitarian and health workers must be protected.
29. Ministers noted alarm at the treatment of UN Agencies by Israel. UN Agencies remain essential to the humanitarian response in Gaza. As the UN Security Council has stated, UNRWA remains the backbone of all humanitarian response in Gaza. No organization can replace or substitute UNRWA’s capacity and mandate to serve Palestinian refugees and civilians in urgent need of life-saving humanitarian assistance. The UN system had an important role to play in the future of the region, and needed to be allowed to do its job, as mandated by the Council and UN members states. They further called on parties to take steps toward a two-state solution and refrain from action that undermined it, including illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories.
30. Ministers once again condemned in the strongest possible terms Russia’s illegal and unprovoked full-scale invasion of Ukraine. They condemned the deployment of DPRK troops in support of Russia’s war of aggression, which represented a dangerous expansion of the conflict. Ministers agreed deepening military cooperation between Russia and the DPRK had significant implications for security in the Indo-Pacific, and that New Zealand and Australia would continue to assist Ukraine to exercise its right to self-defence as enshrined in Article 51 of the UN Charter. Ministers discussed the need to ensure the international community holds Russia to account. They expressed concerns that Russia’s recent changes to its nuclear doctrine presented risks of further escalation and miscalculation. Ministers called on all those with influence over Russia, particularly China, to exert it now to end Russia’s illegal war to avoid actions that support Russia and its industries to re-build military capabilities.
31. Ministers reiterated their shared commitment to realising a world without nuclear weapons, and were seized of the urgent need for progress on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, including as States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Rarotonga). They noted the importance of strengthening the international disarmament and arms control regime in the current challenging environment, including through measures such as nuclear risk reduction and enhanced transparency and accountability.
32. Australia looks forward to hosting the next ANZMIN 2+2.