---
title: "It's Not Ok"
date: 2008-06-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/its-not-ok
ministers:
  - Ruth Dyson
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

The family violence ‘It’s not OK’ campaign is having a significant impact in New Zealand.

"The It’s not OK message is proving highly effective in helping New Zealanders to talk about family violence and to do something about it.  The campaign has a lot of people thinking and speaking about family violence and about how to take action," said Social Development and Employment Minister Ruth Dyson.

'A survey carried out during March and April showed that 89% of people remembered the campaign, with nearly one in five people (19%) saying they have taken some action. This is an extremely positive response," said Ms Dyson.

The Campaign for Action on Family Violence was launched in September 2007 and is a major initiative of the Taskforce for Action on Violence within Families, with campaign work being led by the Ministry of Social Development and the Families commission.  The adverts are being screened again from this Sunday.

The second phase of the campaign focuses on stories of positive change - with men talking about their experiences and their journey of change.

The mass media advertising is only one part of the campaign. It is also currently funding 62 projects throughout New Zealand, from the campaign’s Community Action Fund. The fund supports projects which change attitudes towards family violence, and builds partnerships with non government and other community organisations.  The campaign is supported with a website [www.areyouok.org.nz](http://www.areyouok.org.nz/) and 0800 Family Violence information Line, 0800 456 450.

“This is an ambitious campaign to make family violence everyone’s business. The number of people doing something shows an increasing number of people are no longer willing to tolerate family violence.  This is good progress,” said Ruth Dyson.

Over 905 people were included in the survey.