---
title: "50,000 Calls to 0800 AIRPORT"
date: 1998-07-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/50000-calls-0800-airport
ministers:
  - Tony Ryall
portfolios:
  - State Owned Enterprises
---

The unprecedented public response to the nationwide communications campaign for the float of Auckland International Airport Limited shows no signs of letting up, State Owned Enterprises Minister Tony Ryall said today.

"Over 50,000 calls have been made to the 0800 AIRPORT number since the first advertisements were screened eight days ago," Mr Ryall said.

"Over 15,000 investment statements have also been collected from New Zealand Post Shops around the country and 64,000 copies have been distributed to NZSE-registered sharebrokers.

"To meet demand, the print run of 200,000 investment statements has been increased by a further 50,000.

"The float has truly struck a chord with New Zealanders. For the first time Kiwi mums and dads have been given the opportunity to take shares in a government business and they have responded in droves.

"The objective of the advertising campaign is to inform as many New Zealanders as possible about their opportunity to buy shares in Auckland International Airport Limited through the large public pool and New Zealand sharebrokers.

"The incredible response to date shows the campaign is proving very successful.

"The nationwide campaign will cost up to $4.2 million, of which the Government will pay up to $2.2 million and Auckland International Airport Limited will pay $2 million.

"The cost compares favourably with other major share floats. These floats generally target existing investors through the broker network. In the float of Auckland International Airport Limited, we are providing an opportunity to a much wider group of people through the large public pool as well as retail broker allocations.

"All the advertisements for the Auckland International Airport Limited float have been approved by the Crown's legal advisors to confirm that they comply with the Securities Act.

"The Auditor-General has also been consulted in general terms about the content and scope of the campaign to confirm that the advertisements comply with the Government guidelines for advertising.

"The advertising contract was put out to tender by a panel comprising representatives of the Crown, Auckland International Airport Limited, Merrill Lynch and Logos Porter Novelli. Saatchi & Saatchi Auckland were selected from four bids that were received."

Mr Ryall said Auckland International Airport Limited deserves consideration as an investment but prospective buyers should be aware that shares can go down as well as up.