---
title: "Improving Maori learning – focus of Government campaign"
date: 2002-09-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14795
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The next phase of the Government’s campaign to get more Maori participating and achieving in education was launched today by Education Minister Trevor Mallard.

Te Mana is a three-year information programme, which aims to motivate and inspire Maori to take part and excel in all forms of education. It is being run by the Ministry of Education and is now in its second year.

Today at Naenae College Trevor Mallard launched a new television advertisement for the campaign and a resource kit that targets rangatahi (Maori youth) aged 12 to 18.

The partially 3D animated advertisement features the work of 22-year-old animator Nikora Ngaropo who talks about his decision to take responsibility and get stuck in at school which enabled him to choose his current career path.

“The Government is committed to raising the educational achievements of all New Zealanders and the Te Mana programme has a focus on Maori,” Trevor Mallard said.

An International OECD report -- The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) - shows that while New Zealand students are at the top end of the international scale for educational achievement, we have disparities between groups of students that are wider than in most other high achieving countries.

PISA showed that on average, Maori students do not achieve as well as Asian and Pakeha students.

“We also know from the literature and research that parents’ and educators’ expectations of students can wield a significant influence on their learning success. Where there are low expectations, there are corresponding low achievement rates.

“Te Mana is a unique programme that aims to address these issues. It puts information and support in the three most critical places where achievement is nurtured - in families, schools and communities. While it targets Maori in particular, the resources address the needs and concerns of all parents and educators.

Te Mana is underpinned by a network of 22 Pouwhakataki. Pouwhakataki are community-based workers who help build relationships between whanau, iwi and educators.

The first four role models to appear in the Te Mana campaign - Annabel, Mariana, Charles and Tim have become minor celebrities. They will be reappearing on our television screens over the next few months with more messages about the importance of education, from early childhood through to tertiary level.