---
title: "Launch of Auckland and Waitakere film partnership"
date: 2002-09-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14965
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Jim Anderton has welcomed and initiative of Auckland and Waitakere cities to launch a DVD and other information to market ‘location Auckland and Waitakere’ as film locations.

“The launch of ‘location Auckland and Waitakere’ and the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding demonstrates the value of partnership and cooperation in order to achieve economic goals.

“Screen production and film industries are crucial to the innovation strategy of the Government.

“Since 1994 foreign investment in film and screen production has grown from $44 million to $486 million.

“New Zealand has a strong competitive advantage in creative industries and it is these industries which have some of the greatest potential to create long term sustainable growth.

“The Screen Production Industry Taskforce has a goal of doubling foreign exchange earnings from an estimated $200 million to $400 million in the next five years, and this initiative will contribute to that goal.

“There is also a national objective to increase the number of production houses with a turnover of $50 million to ten, and the number of production companies with a turnover of $10 million to twenty companies.

“The government expects the industry to identify any barriers to achieving these goals and we will help address them.

There are two Government led Taskforces, screen production and design, working on creative industries with industry leaders.