---
title: "Ministry of Tourism releases briefing papers"
date: 2002-09-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14873
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

Tourism is alive and well and represents some of New Zealand’s most significant growth opportunities.

According to the Briefing to Incoming Ministers released today by the Ministry of Tourism, tourism currently accounts for 9.7% of GDP and supports over 10% of jobs in New Zealand. Tourism expenditure has shown a steady growth rate and is forecast to grow by over 7% in the next five years.

Minster for Tourism Mark Burton was pleased by these results, and reinforced the importance of a strong tourist market to New Zealand’s economic future.

“This Government considers tourism a dynamic and key contributor to the country’s economic well-being, both domestically and in the global market.

“New Zealand has so many advantages: a uniquely beautiful landscape, a culturally diverse heritage and a reputation for offering a world-class holiday experience. It is vital to capitalise and build on these advantages.

“Working in cooperation with Tourism New Zealand, the Ministry of Tourism and the Tourism Research Council, the Government is now better informed and able to work efficiently with the industry to make quality decisions that will secure and conserve a sustainable future for tourism in the long term.

“It’s essential to focus on the quality of the tourism experience, and that New Zealand becomes branded by excellence. This is why the Government is investing $2.5 million in Qualmark, to implement a nation-wide network of quality assurance programmes.

“New Zealand can and will become a year-round tourist destination, recognised by its regional distinctions, high-yield boutique products and high-profile events.”

Full briefing is available on http://www.med.govt.nz/about/bim2002/tourism