---
title: "11 September remembrance"
date: 2002-09-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14815
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark announced today that a service of remembrance will be held in Wellington on 11 September, the first anniversary of last year’s terrorist attacks in the United States.

Helen Clark said the use of hijacked aircraft in terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania were acts of cold-blooded and incomprehensible violence that had sent shockwaves around the world.

“It is fitting that, one year on, there is an opportunity to remember those who lost their lives in those tragic events, and to reflect on how the world has changed since that day,” Helen Clark said.

The service, to be held at the Wellington Cathedral of St Paul at 12.30 pm on Wednesday, will be the government’s official commemorative event on 11 September.

It will be attended by Governor-General Dame Silvia Cartwright, ministers and parliamentarians, public service chief executives, senior defence personnel, representatives of the Fire Service, the Police and other emergency services, and members of the diplomatic corps, including the United States Ambassador to New Zealand, Charles Swindells.

The service is being organised by the Wellington Cathedral of St Paul, the Visits and Ceremonial Office of the Department of Internal Affairs, the United States Embassy, the Police, and the New Zealand Fire Service.

Members of the public are invited to attend.

Helen Clark said that flags on government buildings will be flown at half-mast on Wednesday.