---
title: "Goff visit to New York, Washington DC and Copenhagen"
date: 2002-09-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14876
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

Foreign Minister Phil Goff leaves tomorrow night on a 12-day visit to New York, Washington DC and Copenhagen.

Mr Goff will represent New Zealand at September 11 commemorative services in New York and attend the United Nations General Assembly. The visit to Washington will include talks on a variety of bilateral issues between New Zealand and the United States while in Copenhagen he will attend the twice-yearly Ministerial Consultation with the European Union Presidency.

“With the ongoing debate over Iraq, being in New York, Washington and Europe will provide a unique opportunity to have in-depth discussions with a wide range of countries on the issue.

“In New York I will be attending the United Nations General Assembly and will be present for President Bush’s address to the UNGA later this week which is expected to focus on Iraq.

“I will represent New Zealand at memorial services to mark September 11. This will include an ANZAC Commemoration service to honour the New Zealand and Australian victims. I will also attend the New York 9/11 service at twilight at ground zero.

“In New York I will attend a meeting of the New Agenda grouping which is promoting nuclear disarmament and also the first meeting of Commonwealth Foreign Ministers to be held outside of a dedicated Commonwealth venue.

“I will also have a series of bilateral meetings including with the Foreign Ministers of Israel and the Palestine Authority to discuss the ongoing deadlock over progress towards establishing peace in the Middle East.

“My visit to Washington will build on progress made in visits there earlier this year by the Prime Minister and Trade Minister in areas such as trade.

“I will be meeting with members of Congress to promote Free Trade Agreement aspirations and to advance our wider political relationship in a range of areas.

“I will have talks with Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage and Deputy Secretary of Defence Paul Wolfowitz. These will provide a valuable opportunity to discuss issues relating to the war against terrorism and counter-terrorism measures, the situation in Afghanistan and the question of how the international community should respond to Iraq.

“Denmark holds the Presidency of the European Union. I will be having talks with Javier Solana, the EU’s foreign policy representative and with Foreign Minister Per Stig Moller. These talks will cover a wide range of issues including the implications of enlargement of the EU, combating terrorism, the Middle East and EU-New Zealand relations,” Mr Goff said.