---
title: "Pacific kids to benefit from early childhood plan"
date: 2002-09-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14894
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Pacific Island Affairs
---

Pacific children will be targeted to increase their participation in early childhood education in a new government ten-year plan, Pacific Island Affairs Minister Mark Gosche said.

“Early childhood education makes an important difference to the way children go on to develop later in their lives. Pacific children participate in early childhood at lower rates than non-Pacific children so if we can get them into the education system as early as possible, they’re more likely to stay in it,” Mark Gosche said.

Pathways to the Future: Ngä Huarahi Arataki, a major plan outlining a ten-year vision for early childhood education in New Zealand, was launched today by Trevor Mallard.

This is the first long-term plan for the sector since Before Five, introduced in 1989 and abandoned by the then National government.

“We know that some children are less likely to access early education, but stand to benefit the most if they do. Increasing participation is crucial to reducing disparities that occur throughout the education system. This Government is working hard to provide all children with the opportunity to fulfil their potential.”

In 1990 around 3300 Pacific children were enrolled in early education services. By 2001 this had risen to over 8000.

“Our drive to improve quality in early childhood services offers Pacific communities both opportunities and challenges. We’re aiming to increase the number of professionally trained Pacific teachers responsible for providing education and care for our children.

“The Government and Pacific communities will work together to identify and promote quality teaching and learning practices within Pacific early childhood services.

“We will focus on being more responsive to the needs of Pacific children in pre-service training and professional development. This will ensure that Pacific children in mainstream early childhood services benefit from improved quality across the sector.

“Pacific children deserve the best and we’re going to make sure they get it,” Mark Gosche said.