---
title: "Former WTO head Mike Moore to become special trade envoy"
date: 2002-09-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14825
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Trade Negotiations
---

Recently-retired World Trade Organisation director-general Mike Moore has been appointed as special trade envoy by the Government.

Trade Negotiations Minister Jim Sutton said Mike Moore had won great international prestige as WTO director-general during the past three years.

“His energy and commitment to the task of promoting trade liberalisation have won him universal approval.

“Mr Moore is going to continue his work in his own personal capacity to promote international trade. He will be involved with thinktanks, universities, and corporates’ research programmes over the next two years.

“Mike has offered his services to the Government to help promote the New Zealand message on trade as he travels around the world. The Government is grateful to him for this offer and, in appointing him special trade envoy, will give him status to speak on behalf of the Government in capitals around the world.”

Mr Moore’s work as special trade envoy will be co-ordinated by the Foreign Affairs and Trade Ministry, in liaison with New Zealand posts overseas, to ensure the maximum use can be made of his influence and prestige.

The position will not be fulltime, but on an as-required, as-planned basis. The sorts of activities which Mr Moore will undertake will range from giving speeches on New Zealand’s trade policy through to meeting government and non-government leaders to discuss New Zealand’s vision of greater trade liberalisation.

Mr Moore will initially be based in Europe.