---
title: "Dover welcomes Northland regional tourism initiative"
date: 2002-09-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14990
ministers:
  - Dover Samuels
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

A decision to develop a new in-depth tourism strategy for Northland has been welcomed by the Associate Economic Development Minister Dover Samuels.

The Northland Regional Council Community Trust has received $25,000 under Industry New Zealand’s Regional Partnership Programme to research and build on a tourism strategy developed for Northland in 1996.

Dover Samuels said tourism has become one of the most important sustainable industries for Northland, and the strategy developed in 1996 enabled the region to successfully collaborate on developing this important industry.

Industry New Zealand is supportive of regional approaches to economic development and it is pleasing to see the Northland Regional Council and the Kaipara, Whangarei and Far North District Councils supporting the Northland Regional Council Community Trust’s efforts to drive economic development in Northland, Dover Samuels said.

The NRC Community Trust includes representatives from the three districts, local iwi, business and community representatives.  
Northland has been identified by the Government as an acute region with limited access to resources.

The updated tourism strategy will deliver tangible results for the region as we know the tourism sector has high growth potential in Northland, and will enable other sectors of Northland’s economy to grow as well, said Dover Samuels.

Editor’s Note THE REGIONAL PARTNERSHIP PROGRAMME  
The Regional Partnerships Programme is Industry New Zealand’s flagship regional development programme, and the starting point for collaboration with regions. The programme provides guidance and funding to assist regions identify and develop sustainable, economic growth strategies and put those strategies into action.  
The Programme is not about grants for one-off initiatives.

Funding goes to proposals developed by “communities of interest” working together for sustainable growth for their region. Successful proposals involve a cross-section of agencies and organisations such as business groups, local government, iwi, economic development agencies and community groups implementing an agreed strategy. The key is cooperation - as opposed to competition - between a region’s stakeholders and government.  
Funding of up to $100 000 per region for strategic planning, up to $100 000 per year for capability building and up to $2 million for the Major Regional Initiatives is available to help regions realise their potential. Regions are required to contribute to funding as well, and progression to the next stage is not automatic or guaranteed.  
Successful proposals are ones where the regional strategy has strong local support and there is good governance in place to ensure a commitment to the strategy’s implementation.