---
title: "Strong Auckland economy Government priority"
date: 2002-09-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14966
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Jim Anderton said today that launching the Auckland Regional Development strategy means that balanced development in Auckland will be a priority for the Labour Progressive Government in the next three years.

The Auckland Regional Economic Development Strategy was released today at a meeting of the Auckland Strategic leaders group, which includes local councils as well as business and community representatives.

“This is an historic day and I am pleased to see a strategy to remove barriers to Auckland’s development ready for implementation.

“The economic performance of Auckland is of national strategic importance so in the next three years I intend to work closely with local mayors and leaders to help address barriers to Auckland's development.

“With me I will bring a ‘whole-of-government' approach to work in partnership so that we can successfully implement Auckland's Regional Economic Development Strategy.

“If Auckland is not performing to the best of its ability, then New Zealand cannot perform to the best of its ability.

“The very size of the Auckland economy means that if the infrastructure or any other factor is holding the Auckland region back then this holds us all back.

“Auckland is our largest import and export gateway. It has a third of our population and their success or failure has a significant impact on our entire economy.

Auckland has an incredible reservoir of talent and innovation.

“This Government is committed to helping the region unleash this potential.

Industry New Zealand has already contributed a total of $500,000 under the Regional Partnership Programme (RPP) to the Auckland Strategic Leaders Group, and $250,000 for capability building initiatives in the marine, biotechnology and education sectors.

Website www.areds.co.nz