---
title: "Secondary Schools To Get More Teachers"
date: 2002-09-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14933
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Most secondary schools will receive extra teachers for the start of the 2003 school year – an important step in plans to boost teacher numbers by close to four thousand over the next four years, Education Minister Trevor Mallard announced today.

“Labour promised to put more teachers into schools before the election, and we’re delivering on that promise,” he said.

An extra 373 Full Time Teacher Equivalents will be provided to secondary schools for next year – that means most schools could gain one extra teacher.

“More teachers in our classrooms is great news for teachers, for students and for their parents. It will help ensure better teaching, and as a result better learning for all students,” Trevor Mallard said.

“What’s more, next year’s teacher increase is only the beginning. It’s my intention to put 3,700 full time teacher equivalents into primary and secondary school classrooms by 2006 if circumstances permit, and by 2007 at the latest.’’

That is the increase in teachers recommended by the School Staffing Review Group in 2001. These increases will be over and above any staffing increases due to increases in rolls.

There’s more good news on the horizon for schools - there are now 213 extra teacher trainees enrolled at traditional teacher training institutions this year compared to last year, Trevor Mallard said.

The boost in teachers is intended to help with school management, curriculum delivery, and pastoral care and guidance staffing. But schools will be free to make their own decisions as to the best use of the added entitlement staffing, taking into account their own particular circumstances.

Primary staffing increases of 365 Full Time Teacher Equivalents (FTTEs) were announced as part of the 2002 Budget package.

Schools are being advised now of their provisional staffing levels for 2003.