---
title: "Housing Briefings Released"
date: 2002-09-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14898
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Housing
---

A focus on the continuation and expansion of new housing initiatives and the further upgrading of properties are core aspects of Housing New Zealand Corporation’s programme, according to the Corporation’s briefing for Housing Minister Mark Gosche released today.

“In addition to continuing to increase the housing stock to provide housing for those in high need, the Corporation will build on its earlier work and further expand its Healthy Housing, modernisation and Community Renewal programmes,” Mark Gosche said. “It is also one of a number of agencies involved in the rural housing programme to eliminate sub-standard housing in Northland and the East Coast and Eastern Bay of Plenty.”

“Housing is not just about building new state houses. It is also about the state working closely with other housing providers such as local government and iwi and community based organisations to increase the overall amount of social housing in New Zealand.

“The development of housing partnerships with local government and other third sector housing providers will contribute to maintaining and developing the level of social housing provision,” he said.

“The Corporation’s briefing paper clearly identifies that the housing market is changing with home ownership rates falling from 74 to 68 percent over the last ten years, and a corresponding growth in the rental sector,” said Mr Gosche.

HNZC has also identified a need to continue with the programme begun in the past year to modernise existing state houses so as to provide them with modern amenities, for example new kitchens and bathrooms. It will also be continuing with its programme of installing insulation and other energy efficiency features into houses to make them warmer and healthier.

“The rental and community housing acquisition programmes have been identified as significant programmes of work that will result in the purchase of additional housing stock, primarily in Auckland, and of facilities suitable for housing community groups and their clients.”

The briefing paper identifies that HNZC will overall increase its housing stock by 3083 over the next fours years through acquisitions and leases. Of these 2820 will be state houses and 263 community houses.  
Apart from improvements gained through the Community Renewal and Healthy Housing programmes, and in addition to normal maintenance, it will modernise another 1171 houses, provide energy efficiency features into another 10,000 houses and paint the exteriors of 28,500 houses.

“Rebuilding state housing assets, broadening the range of housing solutions, and assisting in mobilising resources for social housing through partnerships are all areas the Corporation will focus on in the period ahead,” said Mr Gosche.

The Ministry of Housing’s briefing was also released and focussed on its goal of reducing the number of Tenancy Tribunal hearings between landlords and tenants by providing effective and efficient mediation through Tenancy Services.

“The more people who can work out their differences without going through the court process the better” said Mr Gosche.