---
title: "$22 Million Road Safety Package"
date: 2002-09-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14960
ministers:
  - Paul Swain
portfolios:
  - Communications and Information Technology
---

Minister of Transport Paul Swain and Minister of Police George Hawkins today unveiled a $22 million package of road safety initiatives aimed at reducing the road toll.

The initiatives are the first steps in the Government’s Road Safety Strategy to 2010, which will be released in full later this year.

“New Zealand has made great strides in road safety over the past decade,” said Mr Swain. “Last year there were 455 road fatalities compared to 650 in 1991. This was despite an almost 19 per cent increase in the number of vehicles on the road and an approximate 40 per cent increase in the number of kilometres travelled.

“These figures show that we’re on the right track but there’s still room for improvement. The government is determined to cut the road toll further and has set itself a target of no more than 300 fatalities and 4,500 hospitalisations by 2010. The first step towards this goal will be to reduce fatalities to no more than 400 and hospitalisations to no more than 5,870 by 2004.”

Police Minister George Hawkins said the drop in the road toll was excellent news. "It shows the value of work done by the Highway Patrols and other traffic related initiatives from the Police. The initiatives announced today will continue to support this work."

“A mixture of education, enforcement and engineering measures will be crucial in helping us achieve these goals,” said Mr Swain.

The main initiatives in the first stage of the strategy include:

- New funding for the Police to target rural drink driving, Auckland motorways and heavy vehicle safety.
- Additional funding for road safety advertising.
- A Novice Driver Pilot, to test potential changes to the graduated driver licensing system for novice drivers.
- Additional funding for the existing Community Road Safety Programme, including a Safe Routes programme to provide support for projects, which give safe access to the road network for pedestrians and cyclists.
- An expanded Road Sense Ata Haere programme for primary and intermediate schools, which integrates road safety education into the every-day curriculum.
- New funding to give road controlling authorities and their engineering consultants desk-top access to the LTSA’s Crash Analysis System.
- A new voluntary Safety Management Systems (SMS) regime for road controlling authorities to ensure they design safety into new roading projects.
- New funding for an Annual Travel Survey.

Funding for this first stage of the strategy will total just under $22 million (GST excl) for the 2002/2003 financial year,” said Mr Swain. “This money is from the $34 million additional funding for road safety announced in the ‘Moving Forward’ package in February. The remaining $12 million (approx) will be carried forward and dedicated to road safety and enforcement in 2003/2004.”

"Today’s package is the springboard for launching us towards our 2010 goals. We will monitor our achievements against the targets set for 2004, and this will inform the development of policies and initiatives for the remainder of the strategy period.

“We can never eradicate accidents completely,” said Mr Swain. “But through well thought-out initiatives, like those announced today, we can greatly improve the safety of all New Zealanders.”

Detailed information on the initiatives outlined above can be found in the ‘Road Safety Package – first steps towards 2010’, which accompanies this release.

Down load the full document: [Road Safety Package – first steps towards 2010](http://www.beehive.govt.nz/swain/roadsafteypackage.doc)

For business information from the government: [http://www.nzbusiness.govt.nz](http://www.nzbusiness.govt.nz)