---
title: "Polytechnics to get greater role in addressing regional skills shortages"
date: 2002-09-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14809
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Polytechnics are being invited by the Labour / Progressive Coalition Government to bridge skills gaps in their regions and boost economic growth and employment, with applications being sought for the Polytechnic Regional Development Fund.

Industry and Regional Development Minister, Jim Anderton and Tertiary Education Minister Steve Maharey today launched the new fund which was announced in Budget 2002.

The Polytechnic Regional Development Fund, a joint effort between Industry New Zealand, Skill New Zealand, Ministry of Education and the Transition Tertiary Education Commission, is designed to strengthen partnerships between polytechnics, local companies, regional development organisations and iwi.

“This new programme combines Industry New Zealand’s economic development programme with skills development initiatives to make sure we get the best results for our young people and their future employers.

“Up to five million dollars will be made available over the next three years to fund proposals that link up polytechnics and their local partners in a bid to identify skills related initiatives that meet the needs of employers.

“Our regions have long been neglected and this initiative will go some way to give them the tools they need to create practical solutions and help their people and their local industries prosper,” Jim Anderton said.

“Employers in the regions need the confidence to take on young people with relevant skills who can make real contributions to the growth of their companies said Tertiary Education Minister Steve Maharey.

“The Government is committed to having more people in education and training and to ensuring that there are real sustainable jobs for those who graduate. This Fund will assist with both these objectives.

“This fund will allow polytechnics to work with local partners and put in place programmes to ensure students get skills that are in demand and industries get the skilled workers they need,” said Steve Maharey.

The fund, established under Industry New Zealand’s Regional Partnership Programme, will provide up to $300,000 in awards for each specific proposal.

To qualify for an award, proposals from the polytechnics and their partners will have to demonstrate consistency with the economic development strategy being developed by their region and the government’s tertiary education priorities.

Proposals are assessed by a panel made up of independent advisors and officials from the Ministry of Economic Development, Te Puni Kokiri, and the Transition Tertiary Education Commission.

Media Enquiries:

Sam Fisher \[Jim Anderton’s press secretary] 021 714 209, 04 471 9289

Michael Gibbs \[Steve Maharey’s press secretary] 021 270 9115, 04 471 9154

Fiona Clark, Industry NZ, 04 910 4376  
E-mail:fiona.clark@industrynz.govt.nz

Teresa Turner, Skill NZ, 04 801 5588  
E-mail:teresa.turner@skillnz.govt.nz

Budget media release  
http://www.beehive.govt.nz/?q=node/13977