---
title: "Education briefing papers released"
date: 2002-09-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14816
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard today released briefing papers provided to him by the Ministry of Education, the Education Review Office, the New Zealand Qualifications Authority, and Career Services.

“The papers identify the issues and priorities for these agencies over the coming years and the strategies to build on the efforts already underway to lift levels of achievement for all students,” said Trevor Mallard.

The Ministry of Education’s brief sets out four outcomes for education:

§making sure all New Zealanders gain strong learning foundations by accessing high-quality education;  
§maintaining high levels of achievement for all school leavers;  
§increasing New Zealander’s participation in ongoing learning throughout their lives;  
§developing a strong research, science and technology workforce.

“The ministry’s outcomes for education are central to the government’s vision for growth and innovation,” Trevor Mallard said.

The Education Review Office’s paper outlines their role in supporting the quality of education provided by schools and early childhood services, and contributing to the work of other education agencies.

“ERO has identified several priority issues that they will focus on during the next few years. These include putting into practice their new approach to reviews, and dealing effectively with complaints.

ERO highlight a focus on the learning needs of Maori and Pacific students and developing strong relationships with communities.

“We worked extensively in this area during the last term, setting up initiatives to provide long-term benefits for these students. The government will continue that work to make sure all students reach their potential, “ said Trevor Mallard.

ERO also present the issues facing secondary education and roll growth – especially in Auckland. They will play an active role in these areas by providing information about good practice and examples of how schools are managing these tensions.

The New Zealand Qualifications Authority identifies four strategies to ensure the agency builds on its strengths in the future and brings together its diverse activities and capabilities. The strategies are:

§enhancing the credibility of New Zealand qualifications through assuring quality;  
§growing organisational capacity;  
§strengthening stakeholder relationships;  
§enhancing systems within the agency to support Maori developments.

“Career Services set out the initiatives aimed to maximise career information and advice for New Zealanders. This includes developing resources and providing support for parents and teachers in career education and developing closer cross agency links.

“The briefing papers together present targeted approaches to achieve successful educational outcomes for New Zealand. The focus and contribution of each agency is central to meeting the aims of this government.

“Throughout the last term, the government worked hard to lift levels of achievement, reduce disparities and increase participation in education. I am looking forward to continuing these efforts over the next three years and seeing some of the sector’s long term goals come into fruition,” Trevor Mallard said.