---
title: "Fire Service ambassadors programme expands into East Coast/Eastern Bay of Plenty"
date: 2002-09-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14992
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Housing
---

A successful programme to improve fire safety awareness in Northland and install smoke alarms in rural housing, will be available in the East Coast and Eastern Bay of Plenty from 14 October, Housing Minister Mark Gosche said today.

“Over the past 12 months, the programme has focussed on Northland, with nine Fire Service Ambassadors travelling the region and visiting isolated rural homes. They teach householders about home escape plans and install smoke alarms.”

“During this campaign the ambassadors have helped develop home escape plans for 3500 rural Northland households, installed more than 15,000 smoke alarms and covered more than 180,000 kilometres” said Mark Gosche.

“The extension of this programme into rural areas between Whakatane, Hicks Bay and Napier, will reach into communities to help those in greatest need, and also help create employment with nine Fire Service Ambassadors working in Bay of Plenty and another nine on the East Coast.

“We know there are people living in make-shift housing in isolated rural areas of East Cape and Eastern Bay of Plenty. Housing New Zealand Corporation is working with Iwi and other housing providers to develop more sustainable housing in these areas, however this will take time. In the meantime, development of home escape plans and installation of smoke alarms can help make these properties as safe as possible” Mark Gosche said.

Housing New Zealand Corporation, WINZ, Social Welfare and ACC together with the New Zealand Fire Service have contributed to a concerted fire safety campaign in response to the deaths of nine children and three adults in Northland within three years.

Mr Gosche said that although there have been eight fires in Northland homes visited during the year, smoke alarms alerted the occupants and there have been no fatalities. In addition, the programme has created employment for nine former unemployed locals.