---
title: "Children a key focus for Labour-led government"
date: 2002-09-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14942
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Improving support for children and families is a key focus for the Labour-led government, says Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey.

Steve Maharey today released post-election briefing papers from the Office of the Commissioner for Children and the Department of Child, Youth and Family Services.

He said the government has a clear vision: New Zealand must regain its status as a great place to bring up children once again.

“These briefing papers show that we are some way from achieving this objective. New Zealand’s core child protection agency is dealing with far too many children and families in crisis – and the country’s foremost child advocate still feels the need to remind parents and families that children are entitled to loving and nurturing environment free from violence.

“The government provided both agencies with considerable additional resources during our last term and we are now starting to see results from this investment. Child, Youth and Family is getting on top of its caseload and the Commissioner for Children has plans in place to step up its advocacy for children’s rights. Solid progress has been made, but there is more to do.

“The development of the Commission for the Family will be a further opportunity to further advance our agenda for children,” Steve Maharey said.