---
title: "First Pacific FM Network goes live"
date: 2002-09-11
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14882
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Pacific Island Affairs
---

Niu FM, New Zealand’s first national Pacific Radio network goes live to air at 3pm this coming Saturday Pacific Island Affairs Minister Mark Gosche and National Pacific Radio Trust (NPRT) Board chairperson Leatigagaeono Simativa Perese announced today.

“The establishment of a national Pacific radio network is one of the Government’s major Pacific Capacity Building initiatives,” said Mark Gosche.

“This government has honoured its commitment to give Pacific communities the mechanism with which to voice their issues and concerns, to debate topical issues, and to build their capacity to participate effectively in New Zealand society as a whole.”

“From 3pm Saturday, 24 hours seven days a week, Pacific voices will be heard across the nation when the network goes live for the first time. Niu FM will provide the opportunity for Pacific communities to link regionally and nationally to strengthen and share their languages, music, culture and stories with all New Zealanders.”

The Trust Board has just completed a series of community fono around the country to inform Pacific communities of the network’s programming guidelines, its new name and logo and to address issues communities may have concerning the network.

“The Board has received an overwhelmingly positive response from Pacific communities. They await the launch with great expectation,” said Leatigagaeono Simativa Perese.

“The network will fulfil a long-held dream of Pacific peoples and address the needs of an audience which current communications channels are not adequately catering for,” said Mark Gosche.

When the network was announced by Government in December 2001 almost $7.7million over four years was allocated by the government from the Reducing Inequalities Contingency fund and FM frequencies in the upper FM Band (100 – 108Mhz) were reserved for the network.

The funding comprises $1.445 million for capital funding for the 2001/02 financial year, and $6.21 million for operating costs over four years.

“After almost ten months from when the allocation of funding and FM frequencies was announced, the national Pacific radio network, a is about to become a reality,” said Mark Gosche.

The network is driven and operated by Pacific communities on a not for profit basis and provides for regional input. Niu FM is run by Pasefika Communications Network Limited, which was established by the Auckland Pacific Island Community Radio Trust (APICRT). APICRT is 100% owned by Pacific communities in Auckland.

Niu FM will broadcast out of Auckland with studios soon to be established in Wellington and Christchurch.

Initially the network Niu FM will broadcast on these FM frequencies in the following regions: Auckland 103.8; Waikato 103.4; Whangarei 100.3; Wellington 103.7 & 100.7; Christchurch 104.10 and nationwide on Sky Digital Satellite Television on Channel 103. Transmitters will also broadcast in other regions in the near future.