---
title: "Tariana Turia welcomes early childhood strategy"
date: 2002-09-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14901
ministers:
  - Tariana Turia
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

Hon Tariana Turia, MP for Te Tai Hauauru, is thrilled that her electorate will gain significant benefits from the 10-year plan for early childhood education.

Pathways to the Future: Ngä Huarahi Arataki, a major plan outlining a long-term vision for early childhood education in New Zealand, was launched by Education Minister Trevor Mallard.

This is the first long-term plan for the sector since Before Five, introduced in 1989 and abandoned by the then National government.

"We know that increasing participation in children's early years is crucial to their success at school and, ultimately, our people's development," Tariana Turia said.

"In Te Tai Hauauru there are 448 early childhood services, with a total roll of 17,575 children. These services are going to see exciting changes with the implementation of this plan.

"National figures show that Maori and Pasifika children currently participate in early childhood education at much lower rates than other New Zealand children. It's this Government's commitment to increase participation rates among groups under-represented in early childhood education and this plan will prove a vital part of this process."

In Te Tai Hauauru, over 90 percent of Maori children, 80 percent of Pasifika children and 95 percent of other children attend early childhood education.

"These statistics show that our electorate has strong participation of Maori and Pasifika children, but there is always room for improvement," Tariana Turia said.

The strategic plan requires all home-based care co-ordinators and teachers in education and care centres to be registered with the Diploma of Teaching (ECE) or higher by 2012. This target will be phased in over the lifetime of the plan (50% by 2007, 80% by 2010, and 100% by 2012).

"We know that teacher qualifications are important where teachers are responsible for providing the education. The Government wants children in our electorate to have access to quality early childhood education that supports their early learning. In Te Tai Hauauru almost 38 percent of these teachers are currently registered. The national statistics show that 39 percent of these teachers are registered.

"This shows our electorate is well on the way towards achieving this 2012 target and a number of government initiatives will assist them to get there," Tariana Turia said.