---
title: "Crown Minerals Amendment Bill"
date: 2002-09-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14948
ministers:
  - Harry Duynhoven
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

The Associate Minister of Energy, Hon Harry Duynhoven has announced today that the Government is proposing to change the Crown Minerals Amendment Bill currently before the Commerce Select Committee. The Mining Act and the Coal Mines Act were repealed by the Crown Minerals Act in 1991. The intention was that existing mining licences granted under the old Acts would have a limited life and would not be able to be renewed or extended.

The effect of the proposed amendments will be that anyone who applies for a new licence or a variation to the term of an existing licence after 5.00pm today will no longer be covered by the Acts that were repealed in 1991.

The reason this is necessary is that in 2000, the High Court held that, whatever may have been intended, the Crown Minerals Act did not extinguish the right of existing mining licence holders to apply for a new mining licence or to extend the term of an existing mining licence.

Since the High Court decision, the Ministry of Economic Development has received several applications for new licences and variations to the term of existing mining licences.

The Crown Minerals Amendment Bill will be passed later this year, but the latest proposed amendments are intended to apply from 5.00pm today.

Applications that have already been made under the old Acts will continue to be processed.

“The vast majority of applications to mine in New Zealand are made under the Crown Minerals Act and they are not affected by today’s announcement. It’s business as usual”, said Mr Duynhoven.