---
title: "Strategy could treble textile, clothing, footwear and carpet industries"
date: 2002-09-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14838
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Growth-focused businesses in the textile, clothing, footwear and carpet industries have a once in a lifetime opportunity to lift their growth, and the growth of the sector, says Industry and Regional Development Minister Jim Anderton.

Next week a series of workshops will be held throughout the country to get industry buy in to a draft strategy that includes trebling textile, clothing, footwear and carpet (TCFC) exports over the next five years.

“While some businesses in the TCFC sector have boomed in the last decade or so, others have struggled,” Jim Anderton said.

“Now everyone has an opportunity to lift their game,” Jim Anderton said. “It’s time for all who work in or around the textile, footwear, clothing and carpet industries to have their say on where their industries are heading, and how to make the sector not only survive but thrive.”

A partnership made up of industry leaders, representative organisations, unions and government has just recommended new strategies including export targets and the establishment a new joint industry organisation to get the TCFC industries working more closely together and provide them with assistance.

“The TCFC Partnership’s draft strategy is exciting and dynamic - but it is still just a draft, Jim Anderton said. “It needs the input of everyone in the sector to be the best it can be. It is time for people to have their say and voice their opinions on how they see the future for the TCFC industries.”

Jim Anderton said the idea that the TCFC industries are declining is quite wrong. The sector has achieved an average 8.3 per cent export growth every year for the last ten years – higher than most other industries. Some of New Zealand’s most successful businesses are in this area and they are targeting 12.6 per cent growth over the next five years.

“I have no doubt that industries in this sector are capable of achieving this, which will be great for them, their employees and the country as a whole. But that won’t happen without a lot of work – and getting solid buy-in for the way ahead is crucial for future success.”

Workshops on the draft strategy are being held in: Auckland, Wellington, Palmerston North, Levin, Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin on Monday and Tuesday next week.

Members of the Textiles, Clothing, Footwear and Carpet sector have been invited to attend.

Responses to the draft strategy will be considered at a TCFC Partnership meeting on 18 September.

The draft strategy can be downloaded from www.industrynz.govt.nz.