---
title: "Government puts Deepwater Taranaki Basin up for bidding by oil explorers"
date: 2002-09-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14949
ministers:
  - Harry Duynhoven
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

The Hon Harry Duynhoven, Associate Minister of Energy, today announced that the New Zealand Government is to hold its first deepwater petroleum permit bidding round over the previously unexplored Deepwater Taranaki Basin.

Five blocks off the west coast of the North Island, covering a total of 42,000 sq km, have been placed on offer for competitive bidding by oil explorers.

The Deepwater Taranaki Basin is adjacent to the highly productive Taranaki Basin, and extends down the continental shelf from about 200 metres of water depth into the head of the New Caledonia Basin, in about 1800 metres of water depth.

The bidding round follows the collection in 2001 of 6200 km of 2D seismic survey data over the deepwater area by Norwegian survey company TGS-NOPEC.

Interpretation of the new seismic data by scientists from the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences has revealed an exciting new oil play — a Late Cretaceous delta approximately 100 km long and 2000 metres thick. This is in addition to play types already identified in the shallow waters of the Taranaki Basin.

“The opening of a deepwater oil exploration area creates some exciting new possibilities for the petroleum industry in New Zealand,” Mr Duynhoven said.

“We will need high technology companies with large resources to be able to discover and develop any oil that is found”, he said.

New Zealand’s petroleum provinces are under-explored by world standards, although most sedimentary basins are highly prospective. New Zealand’s present Exclusive Economic Zone has an area of 4 million sq km, about 15 times the area of its landmass. Within this enormous offshore area are a number of deepwater sedimentary basins.

Many of the significant oil discoveries in recent years have been made in deepwater fields such as in the Gulf of Mexico, and off the coasts of West Africa and Brazil. Some oil industry analysts believe that 90% of the world’s undiscovered offshore hydrocarbon reserves lie in ocean depths over 1000 metres.

The blocks on offer will be allocated on the basis of a competitive work programme system where the exploration company bidding the best programme of work for a particular block is likely to be the successful applicant.

A year will be allowed for marketing of the blocks with applications closing on 30 September 2003.

Representatives of Crown Minerals group within the Ministry of Economic Development will be presenting a series of seminars on the Deepwater Taranaki bidding round to international petroleum companies in Houston, London, and Singapore over the next few weeks.