---
title: "Local MP welcomes Clandeboye plant expansion"
date: 2002-09-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14819
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Agriculture
---

Aoraki MP Jim Sutton today congratulated Fonterra and the workers at the Clandeboye plant near Temuka on the successful commissioning of a new butter plant at the site.

New Zealand Milk Products, one of Fonterra’s two major business units, announced today that production had begun at the new $26 million butter plant.

Butter produced at the plant would be packed for sale from within the next few days. When fully operational, from the end of September, the plant will be capable of producing 250 tonnes of butter per day.

Mr Sutton said the Clandeboye site is NZMP’s largest South Island production facility, processing milk collected from farmers from North Canterbury to North Otago.

“Fonterra is a huge contributor to the local economy. When the butter plant is fully operational the total capacity at Clandeboye will be approximately 1.7 billion litres per year, processed into cheese, skim milk powder, anhydrous milkfat and butter.”

He said that Fonterra’s desire to ship export product from Clandeboye straight out at Timaru Port had been a big factor in Maersk shipping line’s decision to start a weekly service at Timaru.

“The new butter plant will employ 16 production staff, two laboratory staff and four extra stores staff when in full production. When you link that with the weekly service at Timaru Port, this new butter plant is both directly and indirectly boosting employment in our region.”