---
title: "Applications sought for PTEs to address strategic priorities"
date: 2002-09-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14798
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Private Training Establishments are being invited to apply for additional funding to teach programmes next year that fill important niches in New Zealand’s tertiary education system.

The PTE Strategic Priorities Fund was established in the May Budget and will contain at least $17 million in 2003. A further $129 million was also set aside to purchase programmes already offered by PTEs next year. The new Fund has been set up to enable PTEs to meets the skill needs of New Zealand and its regions.

Steve Maharey said the Fund is an important mechanism to ensure the goals of the Government’s Tertiary Education Strategy are realised.

“The 5-year Tertiary Education Strategy aims to transform our tertiary education system so that it is focused on identifying and meeting the needs of business, the community and other stakeholders.

“The new PTE Strategic Priorities Fund will enable providers to respond quickly to meet emerging skill gaps. Courses funded from it will have to demonstrate how they are contributing to achieving the tertiary education strategy and meeting the needs of their local community.

“PTEs also receive approximately $135 million funding from Skill New Zealand for industry training, youth training and training opportunities programmes. The Strategic Priorities Fund is not designed to fund this type of education.

“Application packs are being sent to all PTEs registered at level 3 and above today. Applicants are being asked to especially consider what evidence they can provide for:  
\* the degree of alignment with the education and training needs of the region;  
\* the quality of links with regional development activity (or with an identified national skill or industry need);  
\* the extent to which it enables “staircasing” of learners from lower levels of education and training, into level 3 and above;  
\* the degree to which it forms or improves linkages with other providers;  
\* the degree to which it forms or improves linkages with industry;  
\* the extent to which a proposal complements regional (or national) provision offered by tertiary institutions;  
\* student achievement, including higher levels of education;  
\* student destinations, including employment; and  
\* Maori and Pacific participation and achievement.

“Essentially, we want applications that show how an applicant’s education and training will add value to the system.

“The application pack and the criteria and process for allocating the fund were developed after wide consultation with the PTE sector.

“The Fund has been set at at least $17 million in 2003. The value of the Fund may increase because savings generated from PTEs exiting the system or experiencing enrolment decline will also be invested in the Fund,” Steve Maharey said.