---
title: "Senior Citizens Briefing released"
date: 2002-09-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14860
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Senior Citizens
---

The future will see an increasing need for clear and workable policy for older New Zealanders, Senior Citizens Minister Lianne Dalziel said today on the release of briefing papers to the Minister.

“The Senior Citizens Briefing paper ‘Towards lifelong participation and independence’ identifies how the age structure of New Zealand’s population is projected to change, and outlines where policy work will have to be concentrated.

“The briefing states persons aged 65 years and over currently make up 12 per cent of the total population, and will account for 26 percent by 2051. This makes the issues that are currently of concern to older New Zealanders even more important for the future. We must also address the different needs of different age groups among older people.

“An important part of my role as an advocacy Minister is to make people more aware of the barriers created by people’s attitudes towards and about older people. As well as recognising that older people remain active members of our community past their retirement, we need to recognise their diversity.”

Among the issues highlighted in the briefing are those of retirement income and the cost of superannuation. From around 2011, as baby boomers retire, the cost of New Zealand Superannuation will accelerate, thus the report states ‘Meeting the cost of publicly funded superannuation will be a challenge for future governments.’

“This is why this government established the New Zealand Superannuation Fund in order to make a commitment to partial pre-funding in the future.”

The briefing also highlighted the issues that are likely to continue to be of concern to older people, such as health services, Retirement Villages Legislation, older drivers licensing, the residential care subsidy, and issues around elder abuse.

“The Briefing points out that ‘The focus of the Senior Citizens Portfolio is to enhance the wellbeing of older people’. Enhancing the wellbeing of older people means addressing the issues facing older New Zealanders now and into the future, recognising the changing needs of a more diverse and growing population of older New Zealanders,” Lianne Dalziel said.