---
title: "Training is key to Industry Growth"
date: 2002-09-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14903
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Bridging skills shortages is the key to maintaining high growth, said Industry and Regional Development Minister, Jim Anderton.

Jim Anderton was speaking today at the launch of the carpet and yarn industry’s new training and cadetship programme, developed with $150,000 in funding from Industry New Zealand.

“This is an excellent example of the whole-of-government working with industries to invest in their training needs,” said Jim Anderton.

The new programme is an outcome of Industry New Zealand’s work with the Textile, Clothing, Footwear and Carpet Industry Taskforce which Jim Anderton chairs. All major carpet companies and the Apparel and Textile Organisation have been actively involved in supporting the programme.

“This initiative has occurred because industry players worked together to identify and link industry needs to training needs. They approached government and said this is what we need.”

Jim Anderton said that TCFC sector exports had grown at a remarkable 8.3 per cent every year for the past ten years. He said the industry needed to invest in trained workers to maintain a level of skills and innovation that would help differentiate their products on the world markets.

“The only way to maintain the success of high growth industries is to make sure we invest in people. We need to have training and upskilling programmes in place so our companies can respond effectively to changes in the future.”

For more information on the TCFC strategy: www.industrynz.govt.nz