---
title: "Minister supports Library Week September 8-14 2002"
date: 2002-09-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14814
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - National Library
---

National Library Minister Marian Hobbs is challenging libraries to ensure community information needs are being met in the face of growing and rapidly changing information resources and technology.

The challenge is reflected in the theme of this year's Library Week – "Get it Right @ your library". The week is sponsored by LIANZA, the Library and Information Association of New Zealand Aotearoa and runs from September 8 to 14.

"Increasingly the term 'hybrid library' is used to describe libraries of the 21st century because of the need to remain relevant to their users and manage the variety of information formats they collect along with the paper format," Marian Hobbs said. "The path between the conventional and the digital library, where paper-based and electronic information resources are used and accessed by users, invites different approaches that libraries must consider and practise to deliver their services.

"The development of digital collections poses opportunities for libraries to work collaboratively on many fronts. The challenge for librarians is to build or strengthen the collegial relationships that enhance access to information held within the various libraries in New Zealand.

"The access to information resources offered by a 'hybrid library' is greater now than before. However, it is important to be aware that for some communities, access to appropriate technology is still an issue. Therefore, traditional forms of information resources and access still play a vital role in all communities. Libraries have a large contribution to make to the goal of a knowledge society that aims to include all New Zealanders.

"Users of libraries are becoming increasingly sophisticated and their expectations of library services have changed. The Library Week theme gives libraries an excellent focus for celebrating the many benefits they provide as well as looking for innovative ways to maintain their relevance to their users."