---
title: "Maori Television Service good for the country"
date: 2002-09-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14813
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

Maori Affairs Minister Parekura Horomia said the Maori Television Service will be an important vehicle for innovative and creative indigenous television, promoting Maori language and Maori perspectives on this nation's life and culture.

"Maori television will play an important role in lifting social and cultural development through promoting our own perspectives. Given the young nature of our population, this is important.

"The vision for Maori Television Service is to bring together Maori, their ideas, and broadcasting technology in a way that has never been seen in this country. It is a major plank of the Maori development programme and a major component in building an inclusive and vibrant nation.

"I have no doubt it will prove its own worth. While the establishment of a long-term quality indigenous television service is a complex matter, we are up to the task.

"MTS is charged with the task of creating a service that is quite different to what is already available in New Zealand.

"This service, like other indigenous television services around the world, seeks to achieve a wide and varied set of expectations and be of value to its indigenous population and the population as a whole.

There are several keys steps that must be completed before Maori television can go to air, those are:

- Confirmation of platform - there has been progress on an appropriate transmission platform for the service.
  
  - Leasing of premises - MTS has completed an assessment of its studio requirements and office accommodation. Final decisions on premises are expected shortly.
  - Recruitment of a chief executive and senior management team - a review of the specifications for these positions has been completed.
  
  "Other steps that need to be made are confirmation of new directors, one is a government appointment and two are appointments by the Electoral College, the passing of legislation and programming for the service.
  
  "Papers released today showed the level of detailed discussions on MTS. This, added to the earlier releases of detailed information should provide insight in the development of the MTS.
  
  "What it quite clearly demonstrates is that we are very serious about getting this service established for the long term.
  
  "My hope is that over time all New Zealanders will come to embrace and value the service's contribution to our national identity," Parekura Horomia said.