---
title: "Albert wendt for NZ on air;Judy Mcgregor, Rodney Bryant for bsa"
date: 2000-09-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10014
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

Writer and academic, Professor Albert Wendt has been appointed Deputy Chair of NZ On Air for a three-year term, the Minister of Broadcasting, Marian Hobbs, announced today.

"I am delighted to be announcing this appointment," she said. "It will enhance the experience and expertise available to NZ on Air, and signals the importance of recognising Pacific people’s interests in dealing with broadcasting issues."

Professor Wendt is head of Auckland University's English Department and was responsible for establishing Pacific Studies at the university.

He is the Chairperson of the Centre for Pacific Studies, a Trustee of the Pacific Youth Leadership Trust, has been a member of Creative New Zealand, and chaired that organisation’s Pacific Island Arts Committee.

The Minister also confirmed the appointments of two new members to the Broadcasting Standards Authority for three-year terms.

They are: Professor Judy McGregor, head of Massey University's Communication and Journalism Department and former television broadcaster and producer, Rodney Bryant, who is now communications coordinator for Dunedin City Council. They replace Lyndsay Loates and Joan Withers whose terms have expired.

NZ On Air, formally known as the Broadcasting Commission, was established to reflect and develop New Zealand identity and culture by promoting programmes about New Zealand and New Zealand interests, to provide for minority interests in broadcasting, and to undertake a range of other associated functions.

The Broadcasting Standards Authority is an independent statutory body established under the Broadcasting Act 1989. It hears complaints relating to broadcasting standards issues and encourages the development of Codes of Practice amongst broadcasters.