---
title: "NZ statement to Convention on Biological Diversity conference (COP6), at The Hague"
date: 2002-04-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/nz-statement-convention-biological-diversity-conference-cop6-hague
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

Mr Chairman  
New Zealand considers that the conservation of biological diversity is an international responsibility. It is a crucial component of cultural identity and socio-economic wealth and, as such, is as important a part of the United Nations system as sustainable development and poverty alleviation. This is why it was a strong focus the discussions at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janiero in 1992, and why the Convention on Biological Diversity – or CBD - was one of the outcomes of that groundbreaking summit meeting.  
And for that reason New Zealand believes that the World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) – to be held in Johannesburg in August 2002 as the “plus 10” of Rio - should also have a strong focus on biodiversity issues. We need to ensure that, in the crowded agenda of the Johannesburg meeting, leaders have the opportunity, in the relatively short session allocated to biodiversity, to consider the issues we are dealing with and come up with concrete and focussed recommendations that will carry us into the 21st century.  
This Conference, as the representative body of one of the acknowledged global leaders on biodiversity, needs to send a strong signal to the Johannesburg meeting. It is our responsibility to set before the WSSD all of the relevant information – to give it a “report card” on our progress since Rio - and also to provide practical and action orientated proposals to allow the Summit to make informed decisions on how best to proceed in the next ten years and beyond. It is up to us to make sure that we give it the tools to integrate biodiversity fully into the global roadmap for progress that will be drawn up there.  
To do this the Convention on Biological Diversity must be further developed so it can play an effective role. It is time to move from policy discussions to implementation. The strategic plan that we are considering is an essential part of this development. We need to ensure that it is focused and creates a clear framework based on our agreed priorities. We need to ensure that national, regional and international processes are strengthened, and that these developments are accompanied by an increased focus on appropriate international financial, technical and other support.  
We also need to be aware that these developments would be enhanced by increased cooperation between the CBD and other regional and international mechanisms and processes such as the United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) and the Collaborative Partnership on Forests (CPF).  
But we also need to acknowledge that there is no single, right approach to biodiversity management. Countries need to develop approaches that suit their particular needs and circumstances. We need to give more recognition to the benefit of supporting national and regional processes, based on biogeographic regions, and focus on developing a wider range of tools for directing and supporting these efforts.  
We also need to ensure that all sectors of society are involved in the development of policy and “best practice” on biodiversity. We are all involved in biodiversity management, and we should all have access to the tools that will allow us to make the best use of our resources.  
This means that we need to recognise and enhance the role of indigenous and local communities in managing and conserving the environment. We need to learn from them and we need to ensure that they have a voice in policy development at local, regional and international levels. Just as important, is the need to ensure that communities share in the benefits derived from the development of new technologies based on traditional knowledge and resources.  
We also need to give greater recognition to the role of women in conservation. Women have a vital role to play in affecting community choices, as key decision makers, as important players in economic and political processes in some societies, and through their influence on the next generation. We need to recognise this, and take concrete steps to build their capacity, by addressing issues of empowerment for women in all societies and by providing them with access to information and tools for good biodiversity management.  
We have developed and are refining methods for managing biodiversity, in accordance with our national biodiversity strategy. We are committed to expanding our efforts at a national, regional and international level and are committed to minimising biosecurity risks. We have taken steps to increase our emphasis on historic and cultural values, engaging the community in conservation efforts and promoting effective partnerships with tangata whenua. There is strong collaboration between Government, environmental NGOs and the private sector; and between indigenous communities, Government and the private sector New Zealand recognises that international cooperation enhances national action. The outcomes of this meeting will determine our input to WSSD. We urge parties to consider practical proposals that will move the Convention on Biological Diversity towards practical action.

Background information:

Conservation Minister Sandra Lee is leading the New Zealand delegation to a conference in the Netherlands called to strengthen global cooperation on managing the Earth's biological resources.  
The conference on the Convention on Biological Diversity in The Hague is focussing on trying to achieve  
\*a stepped-up war on invasive 'alien' species;  
\*the adoption of the first-ever guidelines giving multinationals access to genetic resources—such as plants for producing new pharmaceuticals—in return for a fair share of the profits and benefits going to the country of origin and local communities; and  
\*strong economic incentives to convince companies and other stakeholders to pursue measures that will reverse the tide of deforestation.  
Some 2,000 participants from 182 governments and the European Union are attending the conference which got underway at the start of last week with technical meetings for officials, and runs until 19 April.  
The New Zealand delegation at the Hague includes DOC, Agriculture and Forestry, and Fisheries officials and representatives of the scientific community, as well as Foreign Affairs diplomats from Wellington and from our United Nations mission.  
The Conservation Minister has taken advantage of the international gathering to unveil a new initiative to combat invasive alien species on islands. The initiative has been developed by New Zealand and the World Conservation Union, on behalf of our Pacific Island neighbours and other island countries.  
Speaking at the pre-conference launch this morning (at 4.30am today NZ time), Ms Lee said New Zealand would support an Invasive Species Specialist Group, set up by the World Conservation Union, and based in Auckland. She said the group would operate as a broker of information, expertise, techniques and funding. Its initial work would focus on gathering and pooling existing information so that it would be easy to find and use.  
"The group plans to build up a comprehensive information base of expertise on biodiversity threats to Island nations, " she said. "The World Conservation Union's existing global invasive species database will be expanded. The group will also foster networks, promote the sharing of techniques and work towards setting up an independent pool of resources for emergency responses to new incursions of alien species. "  
Ms Lee said in the face of such a vast number of threats to its biodiversity, New Zealand had been forced to develop successful strategies to combat pest species.  
"Invasive pests and weeds have become the greatest environmental threat facing our biodiversity on land," she said. "They even surpass habitat loss, which has been curbed through a range of actions such as the recent government decision to protect an additional 130,000 hectares of internationally significant rainforest on the west coast of the South Island."  
Ms Lee said New Zealand expertise had already helped remove rats from Mauritius, cats from islands in the Pitcairn Group, rabbits and mice from Madeira, rabbits from the Azores and rodents from small islands in New Caledonia and Norfolk Island. "We are committed to sharing what we have learned, to help build international capacity."  
"The New Zealand government has made a considered decision to take a capacity building approach as the better alternative to the much slower option of developing a binding protocol. Such a protocol might require years of discussion before a consensus could be reached, and would inevitably reflect an unsatisfactory 'lowest common denominator' approach."  
Ms Lee said on the question of access by multinationals to New Zealand's genetic resources, the government would be looking to safeguard all its options. She said the Wai 262 Treaty of Waitangi claim over our indigenous flora and fauna had not yet been resolved.  
"I have been advised that some countries are pressing for patent law reforms, trade rules and the establishment of an international register of traditional knowledge, " Ms Lee said. "New Zealand would be reluctant to support such proposals unless they are sufficiently flexible to enable the government to fulfil its Treaty obligations and to develop domestic solutions that reflect our particular circumstances."  
Ms Lee said delegates would look closely at an experts report on whether an ambitious plan to halt deforestation should be adopted. She said one aspect likely to be robustly debated was a proposed Plant Conservation Strategy that recommended targets including the managing of 30 percent of productive land, by 2010, in ways consistent with plant diversity conservation. This would apply to forestry, agriculture and horticulture lands.  
"The implications of this approach need to be carefully considered in a national context," Ms Lee said.