---
title: "Minister congratulates EECA Awards winners"
date: 2014-05-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/minister-congratulates-eeca-awards-winners
ministers:
  - Simon Bridges
portfolios:
  - Energy and Resources
---

Energy and Resources Minister Simon Bridges tonight congratulated the winners and finalists in the 2014 EECA Awards. 

“The line-up of exciting projects at the EECA Awards tonight demonstrates that New Zealand businesses and community organisations are taking energy efficiency seriously – and the results are impressive,” Mr Bridges says. 

Minister Bridges was pleased to present EECA’s Supreme Award to K&L Nurseries — a family-run flower-growing business based in Springston, Christchurch — for their switch from coal to renewable energy as a heat source. 

“Businesses that switch from fossil fields to renewable energy help to reduce New Zealand’s emissions.  K&L Nurseries’ switch to renewables has not only reduced their energy costs by around $100,000 per year, but as a direct result of their advocacy, has inspired other businesses to follow their lead. 

“It is projects like these that help to improve New Zealand’s productivity and competitiveness,” Mr Bridges says. 

Christchurch businesses were strongly represented at tonight’s Awards, particularly through a special one-off category rewarding Christchurch Energy Champions.  Many of these finalists are involved in the earthquake rebuild.

“Altogether EECA received a record 150 entries for the awards, so competition was healthy, and all 28 finalists should be applauded for making it to the final,” Mr Bridges says.

“The energy saved or generated by awards entrants is significant.  It is estimated that together all the entries will save or generate 4.4 PJ of energy over the lifetime of the projects, equivalent to that used by two Hamilton cities and worth $100 million. They have also reduced or avoided 200,000 tonnes of CO2.

“This is the 13th time EECA has held the awards, and they are clearly going from strength to strength. 

“Awards winners inspire other businesses and organisations to see the potential in energy efficiency or renewable energy, and to follow their example.

“I congratulate all winners and finalists,” Mr Bridges says. 

For more information on the Awards winners go to [www.eecabusiness.govt.nz/Awards-2014](http://www.eecabusiness.govt.nz/Awards-2014)