---
title: "Government investment in Far North’s future"
date: 2019-02-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/government-investment-far-norths-future
ministers:
  - Hon Kelvin Davis
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The future of the Far North is looking brighter with Provincial Growth Fund (PGF) investments in key community-led projects across the district, Tourism Minister Kelvin Davis announced today.

“There’s a lot of work being done in Tai Tokerau to drive economic growth and help improve the lives of local people. This Government believes every New Zealander, no matter where they live, should share in a growing and prosperous economy,” Kelvin Davis said.

“We know the Far North District faces a range of complex challenges including high unemployment, an underutilised labour force, and comparatively lower GDP than other districts, but we won’t rest on our laurels as we turn around the fortunes of the regions.”

Among today’s investments is $4.6 million for Sir Hekenukumai Ngaiwi Puhipi Busby’s Kupe Waka Centre, to be built in Aurere at the southern end of Doubtless Bay.

“Sir Hek is truly an icon of the Far North. The Kupe Waka Centre will see his knowledge preserved and also bring people from both New Zealand and overseas to this incredible part of our country.”

The PGF is also investing $3 million in a much needed multi-use sports centre in Kaitaia.

“Participation in sport and fitness is a key part of maintaining a healthy lifestyle and improving the wellbeing of individuals, whānau and wider communities. This facility will create jobs, attract people to live here and help retain workers, young people and athletes in Kaitaia.”

The investment package also includes support for three iwi (Aupouri, Ngāti Kahu and Te Rarawa) to make progress on major projects, funding for preliminary investigations of a water storage project for the area and exploring the potential for a barge at Te Mingi to transport logs to Whangarei.

“Taken together, the announcements made today reaffirm our determination to unlock the full economic potential of the Far North. It’s also an example of the PGF bringing agencies together from across Government to make a difference for people on the ground.

“We understand that supporting thriving and sustainable regions requires a holistic approach, ensuring our towns are attractive places for whānau to live, work and play.

“By supporting projects that look to the future, today’s investment will bring new people to the region and keep them here by creating new jobs and opportunities close to home,” Kelvin Davis said.

**Today’s Northland investments:** Project Description Amount Kupe Waka Development of the Kupe Waka Centre, including completion of planning works and construction. $4.6m Te Hiku Sports Hub Construction of a multi-use Sports Hub in Kaitaia. $3.0m Te Mingi Barge Feasibility Investigating building and operating a barge site at Te Mingi for transporting logs to the Whangarei port. $257,000 ANT – Developing Projects Capability support for 12 months to scope three key development projects $250,000 Te Hiku Water Solutions Investigate a water storage scheme to support local high value horticultural production. $99,500   Total: $8.2m

**Northland Provincial Growth Fund announcements to date:** Project Description Amount Business Case Development – Northland Rail Upgrade Exploring upgrade of the North Auckland (rail) Line (NAL), running from Auckland to Otiria in the Far North. $500,000 Twin Coast Discovery Route Support for the next step in the Twin Coast Discovery Route (TCDR) programme, delivering transport improvements across Northland. Up to $6.25m Hundertwasser Arts Centre Construction of the Hundertwasser Art Centre with Wairau Maori Art Gallery. $9.94m Ngāti Rehia Kauri Sanctuary Opportunity for research and control of kauri dieback in a contained plantation environment, with training and education opportunities. $288,000 Ngāti Rangi Manuka and Kanuka oil distillery Development of a business ecosystem based on extraction of the essential oils of manuka and kanuka. Up to $70,000 Ngati Hine Forestry Trust Joint Venture Te Uru Rākau and Ngāti Hine Forestry Trust to plant and manage 3,600ha of pine trees. $6m Ngati Hine Manuka Planting Training Programme A mānuka plantation and training/work experience programme for 40 trainees over two years. $1.89m Opua Wharf Construction of a new concrete pontoon, 111 metres long and 4 metres wide at Opua Wharf. $0.89m Paihia Wharf Extend, upgrade, maintain and operate the Paihia Wharf. $3.77m Russell Wharf Upgrade to Russell Wharf including floating concrete pontoons, dinghy dock and a wharf extension. $1.114m Kawakawa Tourism Hub Develop Te Hononga Interpretive Centre, a cultural tourism hub facility in Kawakawa $2.378m Waipapa Intersection Improvement Safety improvements to intersection at Waipapa $9m Totara Industry Proposal - pilot A two-year pilot to test the validity of establishing an indigenous tōtara wood industry in Northland. $0.45m Hihiaua Stage One Initial stage of a wider plan to develop the Hihiaua Peninsula into a contemporary Maori precinct. $1.075m Manea Footprints of Kupe Establish an interactive Cultural Heritage Tourism and Education Centre in Opononi, Hokianga. $4.6m Bay of Islands Airport Terminal Upgrade Construction of new terminal building for BOI Airport. $1.75m Marine travel lift Purchase and installation of a marine travel lift in Whangarei to assist boat-building and refitting services. $4.84m Waitangi Mountain Bike Park Construction and delivery of the final stage of WMBP including bike trails and jumps and associated infrastructure. $0.49m Pouto Road Phase 1 Extending the sealed portion of Pouto Road $5.05m Kaipara Moana (Wharves analysis and implementation) Investigating wharves and water transport in the Kaipara harbour, including $4.0m for implementation $4.95m Road re-metalling Improving quality of existing roads $3.15m Pouto Road Phases 2 Complete sealing to Pouto Point $3.13m Waipoua River Road Improving safety and access $1.6m Programme Support Additional resource to assist Kaipara District Council to deliver the investment programme. $1.3m Kaipara Kai Develop a potential 50,000 hectares of fertile land into a sustainable horticultural area $0.98m 50MAX HPMV (High productivity motor vehicle) network Upgrade bridge and road network allowing access for larger, more efficient trucks $0.23m Maori Battalion Museum Establishing a museum to honour the 28th Māori Battalion on the Waitangi Treaty Grounds $14.5m Kai iwi Lakes Project Construction of visitor facilities at Taharoa Domain, Lake Waikare. $90,500 The restoration of Lake Omapere initial feasibility study Develop a strategy to determine the viability of raising the water level of Lake Omapere on the outskirts of Kaikohe. $59,000 Te Waiariki Ngawha Springs Redevelopment and enhancement Feasibility work for an upgrade of facilities and access at Ngawha Springs, near Kaikohe.  $260,000 Tai Tokerau Northland Economic Action Plan Portfolio Management Additional resources to progress PGF applications and economic action plan objectives. $200,000 Ohaeawai Visitors Centre Preliminary work to develop an Indigenous visitor experience near Kaikohe. $100,000   Total: $90.9m