---
title: "Minister hails ICT opportunities in the Middle East"
date: 2004-07-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/minister-hails-ict-opportunities-middle-east
ministers:
  - Paul Swain
portfolios:
  - Communications and Information Technology
---

Seminars on the opportunities for New Zealand companies in the Middle East are to be held in Auckland 7 July, Christchurch 21 July and Wellington 5 August. Communications and Information Technology Minister, Paul Swain, who will speak at the seminars, has recently returned from leading a trade mission to the Middle East.Real opportunities and a desire to do business with New Zealand are what Mr Swain and a host of New Zealand ICT companies discovered.“There is an immense amount happening in the region with increased investment in the telecommunications and ICT sectors and new opportunities following deregulation of telecommunications markets in many countries,” said Mr Swain.The mission, co-organised by New Zealand Trade and Enterprise (NZTE) Dubai, visited the United Arab Emirates, Iran, Syria, Lebanon and Egypt. “New Zealand is seen in the region as a friendly country with high quality standards and an innovative culture. This opened doors for our delegation and enabled us to network with key officials including Ministers, telecommunications chief executives and the Prime Ministers of Syria and Lebanon,” said Mr Swain.Mike Tournier from Airways Corporation says the trade mission had opened doors and provided access to high-level decision makers.“We were able to profile our products and services in developing markets while strengthening relationships and move towards closing contracts in established markets.”Chris Jones from telecoms company Argent Networks says the mission was a great success from his perspective.“In each country, we visited key prospects we have been working with for sometime and the Minister’s visit was the icing on the cake. It demonstrated that New Zealand is committed to the region and that the New Zealand Government is committed to growing ICT exports.”Tim Rattray from Prolificx, a company that designs and manufactures electronics equipment agrees.” Getting in at the top and hearing from business and political leaders about what was actually going on in the region was a truly enlightening experience. Our company is 95% export focused and we have been missing out by ignoring this part of the world. We are currently drawing up plans to open a design centre in Dubai.”Terry Ross of 4RF Communications, which makes advanced wireless solutions says the mission allowed 4RF to work alongside other like-minded ICT innovators from New Zealand, creating a synergistic approach to entering the region.“We see great potential for 4RF in the Middle East. The incumbent telecommunication companies have the mandate to deliver phone and internet services to rural communities while also generating revenue from broadband services for their more-urban subscribers. And Kiwi companies have the products and services to get them there.”Internet security company Endace Measurement Systems’ Selwyn Pellett adds that New Zealand companies should consider the Middle East as a viable market.“The Middle East is a haven of opportunity for most New Zealand companies. My over-riding perception is there is much more opportunity in the Middle East for most New Zealand companies than there would be from the same population base anywhere else, despite differences in GDP and income.” Paul Linton of Metra Information, a subsidiary of Metservice, says he found being part of the official delegation very useful, and commends the Minister and NZTE, for the strategic vision to undertake this trip into an area of the world, not many New Zealand companies know a lot about. “Metra's business is mainly in the television marketplace, and we have had very good success providing weather news products and services around the Middle East to clients in Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Turkey and Dubai. Our Middle East clients are delighted with our service and personally encourage us to extend our business in the region." Marine fibre-optics company Seaworks’ Bill Day is encouraging other exporters to not rely solely on traditional markets for future growth. “Unless we go offshore we are condemning our businesses to be limited to a size that services just a small international city. One of the overseas places that seems rich in opportunity is the Middle East. Kiwis are welcomed there and are viewed as belonging to an innovative and politically neutral country.”Mr Swain says that there are a number of technology parks being established in the Middle East and it is likely that a group of New Zealand companies will set up an ICT group office in Dubai. New Zealand Trade and Enterprise Dubai office was working on the details with potential clients.Contact: Phillippa Fox, (04) 471 9803 For inquiries about the seminars opportunities in the Middle East, contact gavin.thwaites@nzte.govt.nz.