---
title: "Used Vehicle Import Standard Delayed"
date: 2000-07-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10042
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Biosecurity
---

The release of a revised draft health standard on imported used vehicles will be delayed until the Cabinet considers an interim biosecurity strategy later this month, the Minister for Biosecurity, Marian Hobbs said today.

The draft standard follows consultation with interested parties on whether current import health requirements on used cars from Japan needed to be changed.

"I have asked the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to delay the release of the revised standard until recommendations for an interim biosecurity strategy have been considered by Cabinet," Marian Hobbs said.

" The need for a comprehensive biosecurity strategy was identified during the development of the New Zealand Biodiversity Strategy, released in February this year. As a budget initiative, I announced additional funding of $2.7 million over five years to develop the comprehensive biosecurity strategy. In the meantime, Cabinet will approve the interim strategy developed by a small team of experts from MAF, other government departments and industry groups."

In light of the need to align any revised import health standard for used vehicles with the interim biosecurity strategy, MAF now expects the revised draft standard to be available for consultation in early August.

The current import health standard applying to used vehicles from Japan came into force in 1997 under the Biosecurity Act 1993. It states that every used vehicle be inspected. Currently, used cars from Japan are inspected either pre-shipment in Japan, or on-arrival in New Zealand.