---
title: "Budget 2006: More money for family violence prevention services"
date: 2006-05-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/budget-2006-more-money-family-violence-prevention-services
ministers:
  - Ruth Dyson
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

A $9 million investment in family violence prevention services is a key part of the government's commitment to strong families, says Child Youth and Family Services Minister Ruth Dyson.

The $9 million, spread over four years, represents a 20 percent increase in government funding and will go towards non-government community service providers such as 24-hour crisis lines, counselling, social work support, safe-house accommodation, advocacy and information.

“The extra money is one of this Labour-led government’s responses to increasing demands on organisations which provide crisis response to family violence,” says Ms Dyson.

“Demand for family violence prevention services continues to increase, both through raised awareness of the problem and through increased referrals generated by government initiatives. This Budget announcement recognises the increased demand and increases the funding into this sector for the first time in more than a decade."

“I am confident the new funding will offer further support to providers across the sector in delivering their important work in addressing family violence."

There will also be an undertaking from key Government departments and ministries such as Police, Health, Education, and Social Development to work with Child, Youth and Family Services to develop and implement solutions to address the sharp rise in notifications.

The funding will be administered by the Ministry of Social Development through Child, Youth and Family Services ($8.2 million over four years) and through Family and Community Services ($0.796m over four years).

Contact will be made directly with providers to determine specific funding increases.

More Government initiatives to ensure safer families and communities will be announced in the forthcoming Budget.