---
title: "Tiz Revue 2006"
date: 2006-12-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/tiz-revue-2006
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

2006 was another great year for the arts in New Zealand with successes both here and overseas, across the entire spectrum of the arts and across all ages. More people are watching New Zealand movies and listening to New Zealand music! We have much to be proud of! And there's a lot to look forward to in 2007.

Highlights of the year include:

-The Creative New Zealand survey which found that 90% of New Zealanders actively participate in the arts.

-Wellington's International Arts Festival provided another stimulating festival programme, which nurtured and featured many New Zealand works, including the all-New Zealand cast in the Wagnerian opera Parsifal - a landmark in New Zealand's musical development.

-Margaret Mahy won the 2006 Hans Christian Andersen Author Award; Mahy was acknowledged as one of the world's most original re-inventors of language, for her writing which is rich in poetic imagery, magic and supernatural elements.

-The Prime Minister's Literary Awards which this year went to Judith Binney for Non-fiction, Vincent O’Sullivan for Poetry and Patricia Grace for Fiction.

-The quality of all the finalists and winners at the respective book awards throughout the year.

-The Royal New Zealand Ballet's world premiere of their production of The Wedding, written by Witi Ihimaera, choreographed by Mark Baldwin, designed by Tracy Grant and with music composed by Gareth Farr.

-Anna Macdonald from St Hilda's Collegiate School in Dunedin whose song 'Blue Butterfly' won the 2006 Play it Strange Award, and Lynfield College who won the inaugural school award by having four songs in the top 50.

-Tusiata Avia, Jo Randerson, Kate Camp, William Brandt, Louise Warham were finalists in the biennial Prize in Modern Letters and the winner was Carl Shuker.

-The Film Archive celebrated its 25th Anniversary.

-David Innes (Executive Director of the Radio Broadcasters Association), who received the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand Tui Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Growth of New Zealand Music on Radio at the Radio Awards.

-Melanie Burford was awarded two International Picture of the Year awards, and as part of the Dallas Morning News team the Pulitzer prize for breaking news photography,

-the New Zealand Secondary Students Choir which won a Gold Medal and were declared World Champions in the Mixed Youth Section of the Choral Olympics in China; a Silver Medal in the Folk Lore section of the same competition; and were named Champion Choir in the Hong Kong Children's and Youth Choral Festival.

-The NZSO's successful Mainland tour to South Island audiences and the Musical Muster in Northland.

-The calibre of the finalists and winners in the annual Tuis and Pacific Music Awards.

-Outward Sound had a successful first year of operation and granted $538,847.92 to a total of 35 New Zealand artists over four grant assistance rounds. The programme includes music from all genres, styles and niches for the benefit of bands, composers, songwriters, producers, companies and solo artists.

-And the launch of nzlive.com so you can find and book arts events across the country.

Erenora Puketapu-Hetet

We also noted with deepest sympathy the passing of Master Maori weaver Erenora Puketapu-Hetet J.P ONZM. Erenora Puketapu-Hetet of Te Atiawa exhibited and participated in numerous art exhibitions and festivals and was commissioned to produce many works, both nationally and internationally. Erenora was an inspirational leader in the art of weaving for her people and her country - she will be sadly missed.

Looking ahead to 2007

-The 15th Big Day Out on 19 January

-Te Matatini National Festival 2007 in Palmerston North (22-25 Feb) will see hundreds of performers and over 35,000 supporters at New Zealand's national Maori performing arts competition.

-Pasifika, the South Pacific's largest Pacific Islands community event, is on 9 March. This is the event which Aucklanders say makes them most proud to be an Aucklander.

-The Auckland Festival AK07 throughout March promises a strong and vibrant programme of local and international theatre, dance, cabaret, music, visual arts, indoor and outdoor events.

-The NZSO celebrates its 60th anniversary

-The New Zealand Ballet presents Swan Lake & Cinderella and continues Tutus on tour.

It's going to be another great year!