---
title: "Climate change Cabinet papers released"
date: 2001-02-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10262
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Energy Minister and Convenor of the Ministerial Group on Climate Change Pete Hodgson today released nine recent Cabinet papers on climate change policy.

The papers concern:  
· An overview and timeline for the policy process;  
· Proposals for public consultation and communications;  
· An update of research into the impacts of climate change in New Zealand;  
· Transport issues in relation to climate change;  
· Prospects for reducing non-CO2 emissions from agriculture;  
· A carbon charge, industry agreements on emission reduction and pilot emissions trading;  
· Domestic and international emissions trading in 2008-2012;  
· Forest carbon sinks and sink credits;  
· Improving delivery of climate change science.

Mr Hodgson said the papers were being made public in the interests of open government and an informed public debate on climate change policy. Climate change papers are being released routinely as soon as possible after Cabinet decisions.

Public and industry consultation will be stepped up in April. Mr Hodgson said information on climate change and details of the policy package being developed would be widely available and presented in an easily accessible style.

The Government aims to make decisions in principle on the details of the package in August or September. There will be further public consultation as part of the treaty ratification process in October and November, with legislation being developed for introduction early next year.

The Cabinet papers are available on http://www.mfe.govt.nz/issues/climate.htm