---
title: "Streamlined complaints and disciplinary process needed"
date: 2001-03-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10131
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

"New Zealanders with complaints against health professionals must be able to make them as easily, speedily and painlessly as possible," Health Minister Annette King said today when releasing a report by Helen Cull QC, commissioned in the wake of publicity about patient concerns in Northland and elsewhere.

"In addition to a more streamlined complaints system, the relevant agencies need better mechanisms for identifying patterns of adverse medical outcomes to ensure a timely response and remedial action.

"To that end I have asked for further advice on the feasibility of a 'one-stop shop' for patient complaints, and propose to consult widely with the health sector and consumer groups on such an approach.

A one-stop shop is the major recommendation in Helen Cull's report.

"For too long patients have had to jump through hoops in order to have their complaints heard," said Mrs King.

"Under current arrangements as many as 14 organisations can each undertake an investigation into the same adverse medical event. And each can take place without reference to the other. Meanwhile the health professional concerned could still be in practice.

"The consequences for patients can be, and often are, confusing, cumbersome and emotionally and financially draining.

"I have said many times that I am committed to quality in the health sector, and we already have a number of initiatives in train to deliver on this."

Helen Cull notes that many of her recommendations will be met by measures such as the Health Professionals Competency Assurance Bill.

"The Ministry of Health has this month released a framework for District Health Boards to credential their senior medical officers and will very soon be making public a set of sector standards to enable a consistent quality of service," Mrs King.

"While most of our emphasis is at the front end - ensuring we have the training, systems and processes in place to ensure quality - we also need good systems for catching and learning from mistakes.

"I am absolutely committed to ensuring that New Zealanders with legitimate complaints against a health professional can pursue them in a more user-friendly way than is now the case," Mrs King said.