---
title: "Latest energy statistics released"
date: 2001-03-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10264
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Energy Minister Pete Hodgson today released the latest compilation of energy statistics from the Ministry of Economic Development.

The January 2001 edition of the Energy Data File contains comprehensive statistics on energy supply, energy demand and energy prices to September 2000. Information in the latest file includes:

· Total primary energy supply, including imports of oil and oil products, grew by 2.4%, while total domestic energy consumption for the same period rose by 3.2%.

· Total petrol consumption was fairly constant. Consumption of diesel, LPG, fuel oil and aviation oil increased.

· The volume of net crude oil imports increased by 25% on the previous year, while New Zealand's production of crude oil and related products decreased by 18%. New Zealand's self-sufficiency in oil declined to 36% from 41% the preceding year.

· Coal production was 4.0 million tonnes, an increase of 17% on the previous year.

· New Zealand gas production rose by 6%, with 77% coming from the Maui field. About 47% was used for petrochemical production, 36% for electricity generation and 17% for commercial and domestic purposes.

· Overall gas reserves as at 1 January 2000 have increased by 103 PJ to 2701 PJ, reflecting an upward revision of reserves from additional discoveries.

· Average retail electricity prices nationwide to March 2000 were 7.1% less in real terms than for March year 1999. Average prices decreased in real terms for industrial users (22%) and commercial users (7%), offset by an increase (4.3%) for residential customers. (More recent domestic price information, from an MED survey of electricity retailers, indicates that prices have changed little since August 2000).