---
title: "Efficiency of gas sector under scrutiny"
date: 2001-03-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10317
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Minister of Energy Pete Hodgson announced today a review of the New Zealand gas sector.

"Having reviewed the electricity industry and introduced the Power Package reforms, it is now time to put the gas industry under scrutiny," Mr Hodgson said.

"The Government's energy policy objective is to ensure that energy is delivered in an efficient, fair, reliable and sustainable manner to existing and potential users. This must include gas as well as electricity."

Labour's pre-election energy policy noted that the gas market may not have developed enough to ensure the most efficient use of this non-renewable resource.

"The key issues for the review include the overall efficiency of the gas sector and the current regulatory environment," said Mr Hodgson. "Factors affecting consumer choice, such as pricing and fixed charges, will be examined. The review will also cover issues relating to gas take-or-pay contracts - including their effect on the efficiency of gas use, and whether they result in gas-fired electricity generation displacing hydro, causing unnecessary water spill."

The review does not include transport gas, such as LPG. The use of gas in transport is covered in the Government's draft National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Strategy, due for release later this month. The management and regulatory regime for exploration is the subject of a separate review.

A detailed discussion paper will be prepared by an independent consultancy, to be chosen by competitive tender in early April. A draft is due from the consultants by the end of June 2001.

Submissions on the discussion paper will be sought from the public and interested parties. Following this consultation, policy options are expected to be considered by the Government later in 2001.