---
title: "New Zealand director for Pacific Forum Line"
date: 2001-03-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10155
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Transport Minister Mark Gosche announced today he had appointed Dave Morgan to the Board of the Pacific Forum Line (PFL). Dave Morgan will replace Peter Kiely, who is standing down after 10 years in the position.

The Pacific Forum Line was established by the South Pacific Forum in 1977 as both a commercial shipping company and an instrument for regional development.

The PFL is owned by twelve Pacific Island Forum shareholding countries, including Tonga, Fiji, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, New Zealand, Cook Islands, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Niue and the Marshall Islands. New Zealand appoints one of seven directors on the Board of the PFL.

Dave Morgan is currently National President of the New Zealand Seafarers' Union. He takes up his position as a PFL director on 1 May this year.

"Dave Morgan has extensive involvement in shipping industry issues in New Zealand and overseas. I am delighted to be appointing someone of Dave's calibre and standing in the shipping industry to PFL Board", Mark Gosche said.

"And I would like to express my sincere thanks to Peter Kiely for the time and the considerable knowledge and experience he brought to the Pacific Forum Line since he was first appointed in 1991. His contribution is recognised by the Board of the PFL and appreciated by the New Zealand Government".