---
title: "Minister welcomes legislative protection for Archives and National Library roles"
date: 2010-06-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/minister-welcomes-legislative-protection-archives-and-national-library-roles
ministers:
  - Nathan Guy
portfolios:
  - Archives New Zealand
---

The Minister Responsible for Archives New Zealand and the National Library, Nathan Guy, has welcomed moves to protect the statutory roles of the Chief Archivist and the National Librarian

"The State Sector Management Bill will be introduced within the next couple of months, and deals with the integration of Archives New Zealand, the National Library and the Department of Internal Affairs.

"Importantly, the independence and integrity of the Chief Archivist will be preserved. This position will be responsible to the chief executive of the new department and will be protected from any improper influence in performing his or her duties. This is important to maintain the principle of an independent check on government recordkeeping.

"The status and statutory role of the National Librarian will also be preserved. The Chief Librarian of the Alexander Turnbull Library will in future be appointed by the chief executive of the new department, on the recommendation of the National Librarian. The status of the Alexander Turnbull Library will be unchanged.

"Overall the legislative changes are largely technical and minimal. Separate Budget votes and Ministerial roles will continue, and the public will be able to have their voices heard through the select committee process.

"I believe these provisions will satisfy most of the issues raised by stakeholders over the last few months. 

"The integration will combine expertise and resources while sharing back office costs and functions. All savings generated by this project will be redirected into frontline services for the public.

"Archives New Zealand and the National Library are important cultural institutions that will continue to be trusted and preserved for future generations."