---
title: "Barker no scrooge – celebrating community spirit"
date: 2005-12-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/barker-no-scrooge--celebrating-community-spirit
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Internal Affairs
---

The Lottery Grants Record lists all of the grants made in each region of New Zealand in the past year. It breaks these down by Lottery Grants Distribution Committee and shows how much each one distributed. It also highlights some of the community success stories that lottery funds have assisted.

“Lottery grants are made with a focus on long term benefit to communities and with $54 million being distributed over a 12 month period that’s a lot of benefit!

All through the year community groups and individuals received grants made from lottery profits – funding generated by communities for communities – totalling more than $54 million.

“Along with our communities I thank the Lotteries Commission for raising the funds and the Lottery Grants Board committees for distributing them wisely.

“In the current funding round the committees will distribute $54.6 million to strengthen and support communities," said Mr Barker

Lottery Grants can now be applied for online on www.cdgo.govt.nz . The system has recently been upgraded and several committees have been added to it.

While the online service provides information and time saving benefits, paper does still work and application packs can be requested by phoning the Department of Internal Affairs on 0800 824 824. The Lottery Grants Record can also be requested via this number.

Otherwise The Lottery Grants Record is available, free of charge, from Lotto outlets and Department of Internal Affairs Local Government and Community Branch regional offices.