---
title: "Letter to Howard Fancy"
date: 2002-07-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14532
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

9 July 2002

Howard Fancy  
Secretary for Education  
Ministry of Education  
P O Box 1666  
WELLINGTON

Dear Howard

The implementation of the NCEA in secondary schools has raised a number of concerns from principals, teachers, students, parents and the wider community about workload associated with NCEA, especially for teachers.

I hereby direct the Ministry of Education to give urgent priority to developing options that address the teacher workload issue in secondary schools associated with the implementation of the NCEA. In doing this I expect you to work very closely with the New Zealand Qualifications Authority and sector representatives.

I believe that the NCEA should be capable of being implemented in such a way that a good and conscientious teacher would not be expected or required to work longer than previously.

The initial introduction of a new qualification will require an additional investment by schools and teachers. This has been recognised through the teacher only days and through the provision of professional development and support. However when the NCEA is fully in place I believe a clear and achievable goal should be to ensure that the workload associated with the NCEA for conscientious teachers should not be greater than their pre NCEA workload.

I believe that workload can be managed and supported in ways that will still enable the significant educational benefits of the NCEA to be realised.

In developing advice and options I would like you and the Ministry and NZQA to work with representatives of teachers, Heads of Departments and principals. Such work should follow up on the useful points that have been raised in previous discussions and build from these into more depth on the practical ways in which workload can be eased.

This could include:

路Identifying strategies that schools and teachers could use to manage the overall workload for students and teachers associated with the different education pathways that students follow.

路Guidance for teachers about the amount and nature of assessment required for the purposes of students getting good school qualifications. In doing this you could draw on effective practices that have been identified by HoDs and subject associations;

路Developing a range of initiatives to improve communications between the Ministry, NZQA and schools such as an authoritative web site and better support information on, exemplars;

路Collection and dissemination of practices that schools and teachers have found to be effective this year;

Could you provide me with an interim report by Friday 19 July on the steps you are proposing to take and regular progress updates during terms 3 and 4.

Yours sincerely

Trevor Mallard  
MINISTER OF EDUCATION