---
title: "Jobs funding for Thames Valley Region"
date: 2002-07-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14624
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Minister for Economic, Regional and Industry Development Jim Anderton today announced a $30,000 Industry New Zealand grant for economic development in the Thames Valley Region.

The funding comes on top of $88,000 for strategy development in the region and a $75,000 grant for a pilot programme working with language learners and tourism.

The money will be used to set priorities for regional projects.

The announcement comes as a welcome addition to the region’s Economic Development Strategy, created by a team comprising representatives of three District Council territories (Hauraki, Thames-Coromandel and Matmata-Piako).

Jim Anderton, who was in Paeroa to officially launch the strategy, praised the region’s teamwork.

“Congratulations on having worked together in a partnership that includes all three District Councils, members of the business community, and Maori representatives.

“This is exactly the kind of partnership that the Ministry for Economic Development and Industry New Zealand want to encourage.

“The regions are learning to build on their own unique strengths instead of trying to lure companies from other regions—a zero sum gain at best.

“This is new economy thinking, where each region focuses on what it can do best. As a result of strong regional growth in New Zealand, the entire country is experiencing strong gains.”

Thames Valley has already experienced success with their pilot programme that brings Chinese into local schools for a linguistic and tourism experience. Ten local colleges are planning to participate, as well as businesses in the Thames Valley region and Jianlibao Corporation, an aerated beverage company which operates a plant in Paeroa.

The aim of the pilot is to further expand export education opportunities. Jim Anderton was impressed with the programme.

“English language education has become an important contributor to the New Zealand economy, and Thames Valley can offer overseas students beautiful countryside and a heartland experience as well as high-quality education.

“This project shows a real commitment to building sustainable partnerships that will offer unique economic and social opportunities for the Thames Valley region.”