---
title: "Hutt Valley’s digital ops project helps net top IT award"
date: 2002-07-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14678
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Hutt Valley’s Notebook Valley project is part of the Government’s Digital Opportunities programme which took out top honour for the “Most Significant IT project of the Year” at the Computerworld Excellence Awards.

Digital Opportunities is a group of four projects aimed at lifting IT literacy in schools and communities. The programme started as collaboration between Ministers, led by the Prime Minister, and chief executives from several leading ICT and related companies.

“It’s been wonderful to watch the success of Notebook Valley and see the difference it’s making to so many young people, their schools and their communities. Now those involved in getting the project off the ground and running are being recognised for their efforts,” Trevor Mallard said.

The Computerworld Excellence awards celebrate the achievements of New Zealand’s leading information technology users and were first held in 1998.

The primary feature of the awards is that they publicly salute the efforts of those individuals and teams actually making information technology work for their businesses.

“This is certainly evident in the schools involved in the Notebook Valley, (Hutt Valley Laptops), project which is a resounding success.  
“Some senior secondary students and teachers from four Hutt Valley colleges received notebook computers and fast Internet connections in their schools and homes. This part of the project aims to encourage and assist students to excel in senior science, maths and technology. It tests whether providing an incentive, like a laptop, helps with retention of students between 6th and 7th form.  
“There is a tremendous sense of ownership and pride among the people who've been issued with these notebooks; they've been very responsible about using the equipment.  
“Having teachers with notebooks has been a huge success and is creating a positive effect across the whole school with many students actively using their notebooks in many classes. Teachers have quickly realised the potential of having this technology in their classrooms,” Trevor Mallard said.  
This project will also explore providing Internet access to the homes of participating students, thereby engaging their families.

Schools involved in Notebook Valley are: Taita College, NaeNae College and Wainuiomata High School.