---
title: "Broadcasting partnerships promised"
date: 2002-07-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14551
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

The next Labour government will continue to develop partnerships with all those involved in the broadcasting sector to ensure more local content, Broadcasting Minister Marian Hobbs said today.

Releasing Labour's broadcasting policy Marian Hobbs said she will work with the chairpersons of RNZ, TVNZ and NZ on Air to ensure public funding is used effectively and efficiently.

NZ on Air will continue to operate a contestable funding pool for television programming.

"The money the government provides plays an important part in promoting New Zealand identity on TV and radio and I want to ensure it's used to the best possible advantage," Marian Hobbs said. "Improving communication between the key players will be one of the government's goals."

Another priority for the new government will be finding ways to support the growth of regional and community broadcasting.

"Vigorous community television and radio are an important supplement to what TVNZ can provide under its charter," Marian Hobbs said.

Labour is committed to increasing local content on both television and radio.

"We will be working with the television and production industries to produce more NZ content on our screens," Marian Hobbs said. "Our preference is for agreed targets but we reserve the right to impose mandatory quotas."

Labour will also encourage close links between the Pacific Island Radio Network and Radio New Zealand International.

"Our broadcasting policy will build on what's already been set in train in the current term of government. Broadcasting is important to building community and our approach is based on partnerships with the industry," Marian Hobbs said.

The Broadcasting Policy is available on www.labour.org.nz