---
title: "VIOLENT CRIME DOWN"
date: 2002-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14602
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Police
---

New figures show a big drop in violent crime over the last 10 months, Police Minister George Hawkins said today.

“Figures in the latest Crime Report released to me by the Commissioner of Police show recent annual increases in violent crime have not continued during 2001-2002,” Mr Hawkins said.

“At this stage the figures show violent crime is several percentage points lower than at the same stage last year,” he said.

The report compared the 10 months between 1 July 2001 – 30 April 2002 with the same periods between 2000/2001 and 1999/2000.

Violent crime includes homicide, robbery, grievous, serious and minor assault, intimidation and threats, as well as kidnapping, abduction and group assembly.

Overall, the figures revealed New Zealand’s overall crime rate had dropped 2.4 percent in the last 10 months, Mr Hawkins said.

The report also showed rates of sexual offending, drug, anti-social behaviour and dishonesty offences – including burglary – had also fallen. Property abuse, damage offences and administrative offending had either leveled, or were similar to previous years.

“These figures are particularly pleasing coming at a time when overall crime in New Zealand is at a 13 year low and burglary is at a 20 year low,” Mr Hawkins said.

New Zealand’s police should be congratulated for the standard of expertise that had made the continuing fall in overall crime possible, he said.

The figures showed a vastly different situation to current Opposition scaremongering that would have New Zealanders believe the crime rate is spinning out of control, Mr Hawkins said.

CONTACT: Helen Corrigan, Press Secretary 021 270 9131.