---
title: "Labour Response to National’s Education Policy"
date: 2002-07-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14435
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Labour Response to National’s Education Policy???

Professionalise Teaching???

National will  
·Professionalise teaching by better valuing teachers and by providing increased flexibility for schools to reward outstanding teachers.  
·Raise standards of teachers by training fewer, better quality trainees, introduce minimum academic standards of entry, and authorising regular ERO audits of all teaching training institutions.

Labour’s response

When the Labour–led government abolished bulk funding, we freed up money that was sitting in Treasury and gave it directly to schools. At the same time, we increased flexibility so that schools could recognise responsibility, recruitment, and retention needs. The average salary increase shows that about half the teaching workforce is receiving a payment which supplements their base salary.

National’s view on teacher training is ironic considering that the National party that oversaw the proliferation of teacher training providers and is opposed to the government’s moves to focus more heavily on quality and proper strategic planning in tertiary education through the Tertiary Education Commission.

There are currently 33 pre-service teacher education providers in New Zealand - far more than other countries of our size. That’s why the Minister of Education placed a moratorium on the approval of new teacher education providers in 2000, to stop further proliferation. The Tertiary Education Commission will be responsible for ensuring that in the future, duplication of teacher education providers is reduced. The Teachers’ Council set up by this government has a role to monitor the quality of teacher education and the Ministry of Education is working with colleges of education to ensure that they are more familiar with the needs of schools. For example, the new way of teaching maths which is being introduced in all schools is proving a huge success and the Ministry has indicated that they expect all 2003 graduates from pre-service teacher education institutions to be familiar with the programmes.

Trusting Schools???

National will  
·Develop a new self-management funding model for all schools that combines operations, staffing and property and that takes into account roll numbers at each year, educational needs, rural isolation and the condition of school property.  
·Apply the new self-management funding model to all Secondary, Area and Form 1-7 schools from 1 January 2003 with an assurance that no school will lose funding with the change.  
·Give all Primary, Intermediate and Middle Schools the option of being self-managed, Ministry-managed or approved agency managed from 1 January 2004.  
·Allow schools the choice to opt out of national contracts and the national payroll system, and to develop their own site agreements for staff.  
·Develop a new flexible approach to school governance including the option of becoming a ‘Trust School’.  
·Establish a ‘Centre of Excellence in School Governance and Management’ attached to a reputable business school to further build the skills of Principals and School Trustees.  
·Establish a Schools Compliance Cost Taskforce with the objective of halving the paper war demands on teachers, principals and boards.

Labour’s Response

During 1999, National MPs went around the country scraremongering about Labour’s plans to repeal bulk funding. They said that schools would lose money and lose teachers. Yet as a result of this policy, operation funding to schools by next year will increase by $174 million (nearly 25%) over the period of this government. There are 500 more teachers in New Zealand schools and more to come next year.

Bulk funding will not solve the current teacher dispute – it is more likely to antagonise it. Allowing schools the choice to opt out of national contracts and the national payroll system, and to develop their own site agreements for staff will create widespread industrial unrest with no educational benefit whatsoever.

The current system is flexible and fair. Schools have a lot of autonomy but the government is able to use its central power to support schools for positive change.

Under Labour …

·Teachers are guaranteed minimum salaries and there is no incentive to schools to employ either less experienced or less qualified staff – they employ the best person they can find for the job.

·The property system gives schools commitment and security in planning their major building projects.

·Use of the operational funding is flexible and schools are able to use it for innovative programmes to enhance the education needs of their communities.

All schools would like more money – that will not change regardless of who the government is. But the bulk funding system proposed by National will divide communities, as it did in the past.

The Labour-led government is already addressing the issue of paperwork in schools with policies like the planning and reporting system which uses the internet to get better information from schools in a way that takes them less time, and by providing principals with laptops to help them do their job.

Labour is proud of the central lead we sometimes take to give more support schools. That approach allowed us to pay $10 million to provide $75 million worth of software to schools at no cost to the school.

Maximising Parental Choice???

National will  
·Repeal Labour’s rigid zoning laws that impose an inflexible enrolment approach on schools regardless of the needs and differences of communities.  
·Maximise parents’ choice by resourcing schools with the additional teachers and classrooms to meet parental demand.  
·Maintain the right of access for every New Zealand child to a reasonably convenient public school.  
·Give schools the authority to require pre-enrolment of students by 1 November in the preceding year, so as to better enable schools to properly plan and manage the beginning of the school year.

Labour’s response

National’s policy would give schools a greater right than parents over where children go to school. Under National’s policy a child could get turned away from the school next door in favour of a talented athlete from the other side of town. That is fundamentally flawed. Labour’s policy means schools have to cater for local students before letting students from outside their area in. Parents do not have to send their children to the local school – but they must have that right.

National’s idea that the government should fund more and more capital works at the most popular schools while other schools lie empty is a waste of taxpayer funds and ignores the fact that the best schools don’t want to grow bigger and bigger.

Fairer Funding???

National will  
·Review school decile funding to ensure levels match actual education needs better while guaranteeing no school will consequently lose funding.  
·Increase over time, the funding for Independent Schools to 50% of the equivalent entitlement of state schools.  
·Restore the funding levels for rural schools and review the isolation index.

Labour’s response

The school decile system is a comprehensive and fair way of ensuring that schools are able to cater for the extra educational needs of children from poorer families. It was used by National in government. Labour believes that all children should have a right to a high standard of education – that is vital to our country’s future economic growth. Approximately 16 per cent of operational funding is provided as 'equity funding' on a decile basis. That means schools from poorer communities are given additional funding to overcome the greater barriers to learning faced by their students. When you take into account all the sources of funding schools receive (including staffing and property), approximately 4 per cent is provided on a decile basis. Labour believes that the current decile system is fundamentally fair.

Labour believes the government’s role in the compulsory education system is to support a high quality state system. If parents choose to opt out of the system, that is their right and the government offers a small subsidy to those schools. Labour does not support more funding to private schools – our funding commitment is to a high quality, across the board state education system.

It is completely false to say that funding to recognise schools’ extra needs as a result of their isolation has been cut. It has not. Instead the rather crude ‘in or out’ system that operated under the previous National government has been changed so that it recognises degrees of isolation. More schools are now eligible for this funding, and some schools that are closer to larger centres have missed out on the criteria. Overall this is a much fairer system, which National had started to develop when it was in government.

Better Assessment and Qualifications???

National will  
·Ensure every child is able to read, write and do mathematics by age 9 by implementing a nationwide system of assessment in literacy and numeracy.  
·Develop an ‘added value’ assessment model with the sector, by streamlining existing new entrant and later assessment tools into a consistent national approach that will provide better information on students’ and schools’ performances.  
·Postpone implementation of NCEA Level 2 at Year 12 (6th Form).  
·Initiate an urgent review of NCEA with key stakeholders to address the workload and implementation problems of the new qualification.  
·Increase the value of the A Bursary from $200 to $2000 and the B Bursary from $100 to $1000 effective from 1 January 2003.

Labour’s response

Labour does not support such national testing. It encourages schools and teachers to ‘teach to tests’ rather than teach to improve the learning of their children. We trust that schools want the best quality education for their children. That’s why instead of introducing national tests as the National Party wants, we have supported the development of Assessment Tools for Teaching and Learning (AsTLe) so that primary schools have the ability to use assessment to improve students’ learning and the quality of learning programmes. The assessment information also allows teachers, schools and systems to report on what students have achieved at certain points in time, and it provides information that assures parents and the public about the quality of education.

Postponing implementation of NCEA Level 2 is not in the best interest of students’ education. A lot of teachers have already done a lot of work on NCEA Level 2 and it would be educationally unsound not to proceed at this stage.

Labour is continuing with policies that keep the cost of tertiary education down. Remember that under National fees rose by 14% every year on average. Labour in government has put an end to fee rises and removed student loan interest while full time and other low income students are studying. A National government stands for higher costs for students. The increase to bursary National proposes would by no means meet the rising costs of tertiary education that National would encourage.

Preventing Failure???

National will  
·Expand the Social Workers In Schools programme so teachers can focus on teaching.  
·Develop a Schools’ Recovery Action Plan to intervene quickly in schools identified by ERO as failing to deliver quality education to pupils.  
·Review the ORS funding limit and criteria to ensure more children get access to the resources and give greater freedom to schools in how they use the resources to meet children’s needs.  
·Develop a new strategy with the Ministry of Education and Child Youth and Family that ensures every child legally required to be at school, is at school.  
·Vigorously oppose any liberalisation of New Zealand’s cannabis laws and work with schools and drug educators on effective programmes to keep drugs out of school.

Labour’s response

The Social Workers in Schools programme has been expanded under Labour.

National’s proposed Schools’ Recovery Action Plan is very cynical given that National in government spent nine years watching schools fail. In this term of government, Labour has reviewed ERO (a review which was opposed by National) and as a result ERO has changed to an ‘assess and assist’ model so that there is help for problems they identify. Labour in government has also changed the Education Act to increase the range of interventions available to poorly performing schools. National has a history of washing its hands of schools in trouble. Labour has proven that it’s prepared to help schools in trouble and not afraid to close schools down when that is the best education option for local students.

Labour in government has reviewed Special Education and made major changes that will result in more funding being available for special education children at the grassroots.

Both our new planning and reporting requirements and plans for a central records database will help ensure that children are attending schools.

28 June 2002