---
title: "Government support for principals"
date: 2002-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14589
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Over nine hundred school principals are benefiting from a rollout of brand new laptop computers in their offices.

They are the second phase of a Government initiative to build principals’ leadership and management capability.

The laptops are part of a package announced in the 2000 budget worth about $27 million. Principals of all 2,600 state and integrated schools will have the new computers.

“The key professional in a school is the principal. The tone and performance of a school can stand or fall on the abilities of the principal. This government is committed to training for principals in a coordinated way, and this is one of the four major initiatives aimed at improving the capability of our school leaders,” Trevor Mallard said.

As well as laptops, the Government’s Principal Leadership and Development Programme includes:

·Induction training for all first time principals.  
·A dedicated portal for principals and administrators providing essential information and services.  
·A private online network for principals.

Trevor Mallard said that the initial supply of 600 laptops, in March, went to first time principals and those in 180 remote rural schools. This second phase of laptops were allocated to principals who showed a strong interest in participating in the Government’s LeadSpace online network.

“These laptops will support principals in all aspects of their school management. The overall programme provides exciting opportunities for principals and will meet their needs at all different stages of their careers.

“Through LeadSpace, principals can access information, support and facilitated guidance. The network will build professional capability, successful school management and leadership through professional dialogue,” Trevor Mallard said.