---
title: "Forestry policy: answers to NZ Institute of Forestry questions"
date: 2002-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14591
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Forestry
---

Question 1:Role of Government

Given the significance of the above statistics to the New Zealand economy and to the lives of New Zealanders, what is your party’s view of:  
·The forestry sector;  
·The role of government in the forestry sector;  
·The need or otherwise for a central government forestry agency?

Answer

Yes, of course the forestry sector is very important (is the Pope a Catholic?).

The government has a leading role in such areas as: promoting the Wood Processing Strategy (which will have to pay more attention to the high value end), encouraging foreign direct investment in the industry; moving biosecurity upstream to make it more anticipatory; and promoting international recognition of the role of plantation forestry in helping meet world demand for forestry products, especially among northern hemisphere nations.

I acknowledge Jim Anderton’s pivotal role in getting the Wood Processing Strategy underway, and the equally pivotal role of some key industry players.

Having a central government forestry agency would be a silly idea. As soon as that happened, you would lose a whole of government response to forestry issues. Getting the silos working together is a much better idea than a one stop shop trying to look after all of the issues - biosecurity, science, tariff negotiations etc.

Question 2:International Issues

Many of New Zealand’s forest products exporters are small to medium sized companies (e.g. there are around 250 sawmillers and 100 remanufacturers). Government support services to the export business are split between a number of agencies such as Trade NZ, Investment NZ, Industry NZ, Skills NZ and Technology for Business Growth. Although the exportable supply of forest products is increasing rapidly, the sector faces escalated tariffs in Asian markets and a wide range of non-tariff barriers and trade distorting measures. If forming part of government:  
·What policies would you implement to assist companies to develop competitiveness and expand exports?  
·Do you agree that the range of government agencies is the optimum way to deliver services to exporters, and if not, what specific steps would you take to change the situation?  
·What steps would you take to improve international access for New Zealand’s forest products?  
·Would you provide additional funding to the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade to assist in improving the ability for New Zealand to export forest products.

Answer

The Labour led government has increased the Trade New Zealand budget by 15-20% since 1999. With the addition of the new grants for private sector R&D (GPSRD) scheme, Technology New Zealand’s budget has more than doubled since 1999. Industry New Zealand did not exist in 1999.

Some amalgamation of government agencies is appropriate. For example Trade New Zealand and Industry New Zealand are quickly coming together. They are already becoming co-located and have Board membership cross-overs.

Labour will continue to negotiate tariff barrier reductions for processed forestry products on international markets. We must go out assertively to knock over trade barriers. However, this must be preceded by a strategy, developed in partnership with the industry. We need to pick off markets one by one, and not make the mistake of going too wide. Simultaneously we must prosecute the Doha process hard.

Question 3:Log Exports

We frequently hear calls for more processing of forest products within New Zealand, rather than the export of logs. Given that:  
·The current planted area of forests in New Zealand can produce about six times the domestic requirement for wood in New Zealand, without any requirement for an expansion of the area. Therefore, we must export around 80% of the total production potential of the forests if they are to be used to their full capacity;  
·About 70% of the harvest from New Zealand’s plantation forests undergoes some form of processing within New Zealand. Only 30% is exported as logs;  
·A number of the markets for New Zealand forest products impose higher tariffs on processed or partially processed forest products than they do on logs. This means that export of processed products to those countries can be “value-deducted” rather than value-added”,

What is your party’s view of the export of logs? If you are opposed to such exports, what would you do if you were part of the government? If export markets are not available for processed forest products, would you rather the forests were not harvested or that New Zealand continues with the export of logs, which provides income for the forest owners and employment in the forest management and transport sectors?

Answer

It is obviously desirable to add maximum value to logs by processing in New Zealand. That is why the Labour led government has so strongly backed the Wood Processing Strategy (WPS), and why Labour will seek to attract new investment into wood processing to ensure maximum economic advantage to New Zealand from our plantation forestry resources.

However, forest owners will understandably seek the maximum return for their trees when they are ready for harvest, and are entitled to export them as logs if they wish. The challenge is to make supplying those logs for on-shore processing more attractive than exporting them. Of all the issues facing processors in this regard, tariffs are possibly the most important.

Question 4:Regional Infrastructure and Development

Forestry is a regional industry. Considerable increases in production in some regions will strain regional infrastructure. Some issues are:  
·One local authority spokesperson recently stated that he would rather see the logs remain unharvested than have log trucks as an increasing feature of the region’s roads. How will your party address this issue?  
·The current government has become involved in strategies to encourage regional development in the East Coast and Northland. Do you see this as a valid role of government and what are your party’s policies for regional development?

Answer

Conservation forestry does have a role in soil conservation, provision of water resources etc. Some trees will never come down until they die. However, not harvesting them for reasons of roading infrastructure is clearly the wrong analysis.

Regional development is a valid role for government, and the Labour led government has led the way since 1999. Issues of regional infrastructure etc must be worked through in partnership, for example through the Wood Processing Strategy. Roading happens to be one of the success stories of the WPS.

Question 5:Kyoto

The recently released Preferred Policy Package on Climate Change has met a mixed reaction from the forest industry. The New Zealand Institute of Forestry has generally supported the forestry provisions, but they have been criticised by the Forest Owners Association and some farm foresters. Some commentators have suggested that the Government’s preferred policy will see forest carbon sink credits nationalised and used to shield (and therefore subsidise) less efficient industries that, in some cases, compete with forestry. There are also concerns that, while the Government is on track to ratify the protocol this year, some of our major trading partners, including Australia and the USA are not. What will your party do if in government after the election with respect to the Kyoto Protocol in general and the forestry proposals in particular?

Answer

New Zealand has more at stake in avoiding the extremes of climate change than any other developed nation, because we owe our prosperity to a stable equable climate that is ideal for primary production. Only concerted international action on global warming will have any effect on human-induced changes in the world’s climate. Accordingly, Labour will ratify the Kyoto Protocol. In any event, not ratifying the Protocol would mean New Zealand setting fire to a $200 million plus cheque per annum in terms of our being a net seller of carbon credits into the international market, at, say, $20 per tonne.

The government will retain these credits but will also retain deforestation liabilities. The forestry industry saw the distinction between pre-1990 and post 1990 forests as arbitrary, and said it would rather not wear deforestation costs. To the industry, the prospective transaction costs of measuring and accounting for individual carbon holdings were horrendous, compared with the much simpler means of doing so collectively, for example by satellite imagery. That is why we came up with the policy we did.

Question 6:Genetic Engineering:

We have heard much of the various parties’ views on genetic engineering and the current moratorium on the release of genetically modified organisms. Genetic engineering techniques could have many applications in the forest industry. Without traversing the more general debate (i.e. moratorium, medical use, food crops and labelling), please detail your party’s policy with respect to genetic engineering techniques and the use of genetically modified organisms in forestry in New Zealand.

Answer

Labour will pursue a genetic modification (GM) strategy broadly in line with the recommendations of the Royal Commission, aimed at preserving opportunities, proceeding with caution, and ensuring that the health and safety of New Zealanders is paramount. We reject extreme approaches that would on the one hand expose New Zealanders to unnecessary risk, or on the other close off potential benefits in medicine, agriculture, forestry, pest control and other sectors.

Smart uses of GM may offer big environmental gains.

Imagine if we can grow GM carrots that, when used as bait, reduce fertility in possums. Imagine producing GM pine trees that are sterile and therefore don’t spread beyond plantation boundaries, don’t release pollen into allergic noses, and put all their energy into wood production instead of seed production. Imagine that we reduce, using GM techniques, the lignin content in wood fibre so that fewer chemicals and less energy are needed to produce paper. Or that we increase resistance to sapstain and rot using GM techniques so we can use fewer chemicals in timber processing.

Question 7:Indigenous Forest Management

The issue of production from New Zealand’s indigenous forests has generated considerable controversy over many years. This year the NZ government all but ended indigenous production forest operations on Crown owned land (12,000 hectares in Southland are still under production via a Treaty of Waitangi settlement). This will restrict the supply of a range of domestically produced timber and increase pressure to import alternative species from natural forests elsewhere in the world.

·What is your party’s policy with respect to the sustainable management, including timber production, of indigenous forests, both those in private ownership and those on Crown owned land;  
·What plans does your party have to ensure a supply of wood of alternative species for use in New Zealand;  
·How would you ensure that alternatives to wood from our indigenous forests are not coming from unsustainably managed natural forests elsewhere in the world.

Answer

The Labour led government, in which I am both the Minister of Forestry and the Minister Responsible for Timberlands West Coast Ltd, stopped the logging of Crown-managed indigenous forests, and transferred them to the conservation estate.

Labour will require best practice in sustainable forestry management of private indigenous forests. The recently-released report of the Primary Production Select Committee, ‘A Sustainable Future for our Indigenous Forests’, is instructive in this regard. It shows the way forward for the sustainable management of this resource in the future.

Compared with our exports, modest amounts of timber are imported into New Zealand (39,000 cubic metres in 2000), mostly from Canada (46%), and Australia (23%). The USA and Fiji each provided 7.5% of imports, Indonesia 2.5%, and all other countries 13.5 %.

Labour will develop a timber procurement policy aimed at ensuring that timber products used by the New Zealand government can be verified as coming from sustainably managed forests. Also, we will work towards ensuring that only sustainably produced timber is imported into New Zealand, and to this end work with timber importers and environmental groups.

Question 8:Sustainable Management of Forests

New Zealand is one of over 150 countries participating in the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“WSSD”) in South Africa in September this year. At least part of the final text of the forestry section has already been agreed. Clause 43 (d) commits governments to “Take immediate action at national and international levels to promote and facilitate the means to achieve sustainable timber harvesting, and to facilitate the provision of financial resources and transfer and development of environmentally sound technologies, and thereby address unsustainable timer harvesting practices.”

New Zealand’s sustainable harvesting practice in indigenous forests on Crown land has been recognised by United Nations experts as leading the world and has been a great inspiration to foresters from countries harvesting their indigenous forests unsustainably. What steps would your party take, if forming part of the Government, to share such practical experience with those of our Pacific neighbours who require such encouragement in terms of clause 43 (d) of the WSSD agreement?

In many countries, plantation forestry has a poor image in terms of sustainability. How would your government promote New Zealand’s approach to sustainable forest management in the international arena?

Answer

The role of planted forests in sustainable forest management (SFM) is promoted by New Zealand through fora such as the United Nations Forum on Forestry. It is being increasingly recognised that planted forests can contribute positively to global SFM. A meeting in New Zealand on planted forests with invited international experts is scheduled for March 2003. The New Zealand industry initiative for certification of planted forests is a step towards establishing the place of planted forests in SFM.

New Zealand provides assistance to other countries on techniques and understanding regarding SFM through UN fora (e.g. UNFF, Montreal Process) and regional fora such as the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission. The Convention on Biological Diversity aims to share information on sustainable use, including forestry. Some industry initiatives also help, such as the Imported Tropical Timber Group’s work on the imported timber trade.

Question 9:Monocultures & Alternative Species

There have been criticisms of the reliance of the forest industry on radiata pine and the creation of monocultures. While there are biological risks associated with monocultures, the domination of one or a few species also reduces the choice for domestic consumers of wood products. What are your party’s views on:  
·The domination of radiata pine in the forests?  
·The need for greater a greater range of commercially grown species?  
·The role of government, if any, in expanding the range of commercially grown species?

Answer

While applauding the huge benefits that pinus radiata has brought the New Zealand forestry industry and the country, the government recognises the biological risks associated with monocultures. Accordingly, the government will encourage greater diversification, which is most likely to be pursued by farm foresters. The government has already contributed through research. It is worth noting that a number of non-radiata species are now coming on stream in useful volumes.

Question 10:Treaty of Waitangi

The agreement with Maori of 1989, the subsequent Crown Forest Assets Act that allowed the sale of Crown forests in 1990 and 1992 and the associated establishment of the Crown Forestry Rental Trust created a regime for resolving treaty claims over Crown forest land. In recent years there have been suggestions that the Rental Trust funds are being used for progressing claims that are not involved or only marginally involved with the forests from which the funds are derived. There are concerns about delays in resolving the claims over the forest and with some of the possible outcomes from settlements. If forming part of the government after the election, what would your party do:  
·To progress Treaty settlements generally and those affecting forests in particular;  
·To resolve criticisms about the Crown Forestry Rental Trust and to fund the Waitangi Tribunal.

Does your party have any particular concerns about the possible outcomes from settlements, including the subsequent sale of forest land to overseas forestry companies and the potential for fragmentation of ownership of large concentrations of forest such as those in the central North Island. If you have concerns, what will you do to resolve them?

Answer

Labour will continue to move as fast as we can with a fair and just Treaty settlement process for legitimate claims. The process is about reconciliation and finding a way forward with mutual respect.

The Labour led government has provided extra funding for the Waitangi Tribunal that should see inquiries covering historical claims completed by 2010.

The Government has also established a Ministerial group to progress central North Island forestry claims. Many issues need to be resolved before actual settlement negotiations can begin.

The Crown has already made good progress in settling forestry claims elsewhere.  
Labour recognises that it is time to assess how section 34 of the Crown Forest Assets Act 1989 (under which the Crown Forestry Rental Trust was established) has worked.

Question 11:Forest Management Certification

As noted earlier, over one third of the plantation forests have attained internationally recognised sustainable forest management standards. However, the cost of attaining this for small holdings is quite significant, as the standards do not readily provide for consideration as a single entity of a farm forestry operation or of several, separately owned plantations or farm forests. What does your party propose to do to assist the acceptance of lower cost standards for the accreditation of small forestry holdings?

Answer

This issue needs to be addressed on a collective basis, and the Wood Processing Strategy - where farm foresters are already represented - would be a good place to do it. Issues of best practice etc could be examined, as might clubbing together to share peer review. Working parties under the WPS have addressed this type of issue successfully over the past couple of years.

Question 12:Tax

Over the last two decades, there have been many changes in the taxation regime applied to growing forests. It takes 9-10 election cycles for a radiata pine crop to reach maturity and 15 election cycles for a Douglas fir crop. Changes in the tax regime may penalise a forest owner who cannot change decisions made many years earlier. What is your party’s view of the current forestry tax regime and what changes do you plan to make if you become part of a government?

Answer

Labour is satisfied with the current taxation regime and has no plans to change it.

Question 13:Biosecurity, Pest Control

New Zealand’s indigenous and plantation forests are very vulnerable to introduced pests and diseases. Recent experience has demonstrated the high costs of trying to eradicate a pest once introduced. What are your party’s policies with respect to:  
·Prevention of the introduction of new pests and diseases;  
·Control of pests and diseases that are found to have entered New Zealand;  
·Protection of the indigenous forests from the ravages of possums and other introduced animals;  
·The use of 1080 for possum control.

Answer

The Labour led government has significantly increased biosecurity funding, upgraded border controls, and initiated development of a biosecurity strategy for New Zealand. Labour will continue to upgrade biosecurity measures, in order to keep new pests out of the country and to deal effectively with those already here. We will pay close attention to forestry biosecurity issues, with more emphasis on actively anticipating and dealing with new incursions.

Labour will ensure sufficient funding for weed and integrated pest control in Crown-managed indigenous forests and generally on the public conservation estate, to maintain and improve ecosystem health and to adequately protect threatened species from the impact of plant and animal pests.

Labour is committed to using the best tools available for pest control depending on prevailing local conditions. For large-scale possum control, and especially in steep terrain, 1080 is usually the best and most environmentally acceptable method.

Question 14:Resource Management etc.

The increasing costs of compliance with government-imposed constraints such as the Resource Management Act are working against forestry, which either alone or in combination with farming, could provide more economical and environmentally sustainable land uses than currently exist. Does your party see forestry as a means for better sustainable use of much of our rural land? If so, what strategies would you employ to encourage it?

Answer

Compliance with the RMA and other standards does not appear to have unduly inhibited the continuing expansion of the plantation forestry industry (by some 40,000 hectares per annum). However, Labour wants to enhance the Act’s effectiveness and efficiency, and will work to reduce delays and eliminate unnecessary costs in the Act’s application.

Given the long-term nature of plantation forestry crops, it is important to resolve potential conflicts with other land or resource uses at the outset. In practice, these matters are dealt with mainly by regional and district councils in the writing and application of their planning documents. They know local circumstances best.

Question 15:“Leaking Building Syndrome”

Radiata pine is not naturally durable. When originally promoted as a building timber, radiata was treated with borate (the H1 classification), which not only protected against borer infestation but also added significant rot protection. The current H1 standard is rather different from that used in the 1960s and while still protecting against borer, it has much lower rot prevention. It is understood that some of the reported rot in more modern buildings could be due to this less durable framing timber being exposed to moisture (plumbing, flashing and cladding failures) and therefore decaying. If this summary of the situation is correct, what steps will your party take to:  
·Inform the public?  
·Alter building practice or treatment standards to restore the image of radiata as a building timber?

Answer

Labour will complete the review of the Building Act and implement, as appropriate, the recommendations of the Building Industry Authority inquiry into weather-tightness.

Question 16:Training

The increase in potential harvest volumes will lead to additional employment opportunities. What policies does your party have to encourage training for the forest industry, including training for potential new employees?

Answer

The Labour led government has implemented strong training policies across the economy, including the new modern apprenticeships programme.

In addition, the Labour led government has, through the Wood Processing Strategy, supported a forestry training initiative that will see a centre of excellence established in Rotorua. This will improve the skills and capabilities of the people engaged in the various forestry industry sectors.