---
title: "Give kids a chance"
date: 2002-07-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14541
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said there was nothing to stop the PPTA acting tonight to call off rostered days home due to start tomorrow. It is in their power.

The Minister has today formally asked the PPTA to lift industrial action and has copied the letter to all secondary schools.

“Parents around the country should be asking teachers why they are accepting the PPTA’s need for strikes when such a clear process towards resolution has been approved by negotiators,” Trevor Mallard said.

“Parents should also be aware of schools’ responsibility to provide a safe place to study, even if teachers are involved in industrial action. If they have any doubts they should send children to school.

“The government and PPTA have agreed to a process of independent arbitration. We have agreed on terms of reference and membership. Both the Prime Minister and I have clearly stated the government’s intention to accept the outcome recommended by the independent panel. At the same time, we recognise that PPTA processes mean that they would have to seek ratification from members before they accept the outcome.

“I don’t, however, accept the PPTA executive’s view that it needs to take the arbitration process to their members. Their veto comes later.

“This is a win-win situation for teachers and I believe teachers around the country will be very supportive.

“Rostered days home this week do not need to happen and I have asked that all other industrial action be lifted as soon as possible.”

Trevor Mallard confirmed that former Assistant Commissioner of Industrial Relations (State Services Commission) Doug Martin is the third member of the panel. He had been suggested by PPTA negotiators. Former Tawa College Principal Bruce Murray and former public service chief executive Dame Margaret Bazley are also on the panel.

“This is a good way forward and we would expect industrial action to be lifted including stopwork on NCEA and the ban on extra curricular activities. In the meantime, I urge the PPTA to call off the rostered days home,” Trevor Mallard said.