---
title: "Mangere Home Visiting Service starts"
date: 2002-07-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14524
ministers:
  - Tariana Turia
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health information will be delivered in person to Mangere families, with the launch of a pilot home visiting service, Associate Health Minister Tariana Turia said today.

Community health professionals will visit households to provide information, community support, and help to access other local health and social services.

"For example, someone with diabetes will get information on the disorder, advice about the relevant services, and help to access those services," said Mrs Turia.

"By visiting people at home, health professionals get to meet the whole whanau, and involve and empower them in caring for each other. Everyone gets to learn about the support services that are available close at hand. Everyone learns about prevention and management of illness, and how to promote good health.”

The Mangere home visiting service will be offered by The Hawaiki Programme, a joint venture between South Seas Health Mangere and Turuki Health Care  
Hawaiki. These two providers are already offering health and social services to the community.

Tariana Turia said the partnership of Maori and Pacific Island providers helped to restore relationships based on whakapapa, and overcome the attitudes and values that lead to competition between tangata whenua and Maori from Hawaiki.

“When we cannot acknowledge our relationships as Maori, we have lost our proper place in the world. That is the time to remind ourselves that Tama Nui te Ra, the Polynesian sun, is strong enough keep us all warm,” she said.

Tariana Turia also said the home visiting service integrated government health and community services, and represented community development in action.

“While the service is funded from the health budget, the approach recognises that good health or ‘wellness’ depends on many factors,” she said. “A person’s health can be affected by a lack of information or knowledge, poor housing, difficult family circumstances, language differences, unemployment, and so on.

“One key way the home visiting service can improve health of individuals, is to improve co-ordination among agencies. This will benefit the whole community, not just current clients.

“It really is a cause for celebration. We all benefit, community and government, if the services we provide deliver the results we all want,” she said.

ENDS

For information contact:  
Andrew Robb04- 471 9818 or 021- 390 018  
andrew.robb@parliament.govt.nz

Background

When was the home visiting service devised?  
Development of the concept began when the Ministry of Health was given approval to begin work in October 2000. The Mangere pilot has been developed by the Ministry of Health in collaboration with Counties-Manukau District Health Board and Tainui MAPO.

How do the health professionals decide which families to visit?  
There is no formal referral process. The pilot service is voluntary which means it is up to individual members of the community to decide if they want to use the services on offer. The provider will make every effort to offer the service to those most in need.  
As well as home visiting there will be community education sessions run on a broad range of health promotion, social and educational topics.

How much does it cost users?  
It's a free service for those most in need.

What other home based visiting strategies have been used in New Zealand?  
Parents as First Teachers, Early Start, Family Start and First Years of Life - these four services see a mix of home visitors making house calls to families with young children. The Mangere home visiting service will benefit all age groups.

Who are the health professionals?  
The health professionals will come from a variety of backgrounds. They could be nurses, social workers, community health workers and other allied health professionals who have gone through the training required. They will have a range of skills and experience but will be employed mostly for their ability to develop effective relationships.

The Hawaiki Programme home visiting staff are currently taking part in training offered by Mauri Ora Associates working in collaboration with the home visiting providers.