---
title: "Government support for gifted and talented children"
date: 2002-07-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14507
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Government policy has taken a major step forward and for the first time is offering substantial more support for gifted and talented students.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard today released the government’s response to the gifted and talented students’ working party, which reported to government in November last year.

Speaking at a meeting of the Canterbury Gifted Children Association in Christchurch this evening, Trevor Mallard said the special education needs of gifted and talented student were often overlooked.

“Through our response, we recognise that, like all learners, gifted and talented students need appropriate educational opportunities. This recognition is consistent with the Government's ongoing commitment to developing human capability,” Trevor Mallard said.

“We have agreed to implement many of the recommendations including:

·Recognition of gifted and talented learners in the National Administration Guidelines (NAGs) in 2004  
·The establishment of a Gifted Education Advisory Committee  
·Professional development for teachers and a tripling of the number of advisers (from 4 to 12)  
·A contestable funding pool to help schools get new programmes, which support gifted and talented students, off the ground  
·A parent publication, and  
·Research into existing provision for gifted and talented students.

“These initiatives are a substantial commitment to education for gifted and talented learners. The Government is committing $1.4 million a year for the research, innovation and specialist programmes and $1.5 million a year for professional development and advisory support from the beginning of next year.

“But this also signals an attitude change. Government has a role in supporting and helping gifted and talented children soar. That is something that was also part of the Labour Education Policy released last week,” Trevor Mallard said.

More information available online from Wednesday 10 July at http://www.tki.org.nz/e/gifted/