---
title: "New Mangere factory to provide 400 new jobs"
date: 2002-07-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14545
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

A joint venture between New Zealander John Corner and American beef jerky company Jack Link’s will result in 400 new jobs over the next two years, Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton announced today.

Products from the new Jack Link’s factory in Mangere will be exported to the American market.

At the official opening, Jim Anderton praised the project’s potential.

“This is an excellent example of the type of business that will create sustainable growth in New Zealand.

“Instead of sending raw, low-value commodites overseas, this plant uses advanced technology to create a high-value export product.

“Not only does this mean added value in the global marketplace—it also means sustainable, long-term, skilled jobs for New Zealanders.”

Jim Anderton also congratulated John Corner for establishing a profitable affiliation with Jack and Jay Link, American owners of the Jack Link parent company.

“This is the kind of constructive, incoming investment this Government wants to encourage.

“Instead of selling our assets for short-term cash injections we want to foster ongoing partnerships with overseas investors.

“New Zealand needs incoming investment capital and expertise to grow our local industries, but not at the expense of our national interests. We need more joint ventures that support sustainable local jobs and provide us with long-term development opportunities.

“By opening an industrial facility like this in Mangere, we can show the world that New Zealand is a good economy and society in which to do business.”

The Jack Link’s project was assisted by Industry New Zealand, which provided funding for feasibility studies and also facilitated a wage subsidy guarantee through WINZ.

Many of the factory’s jobs will be filled by those who have been in the long-term unemployment category.

Links Snacks is one of the largest meat snack manufacturers in the USA, with four plants in the USA, one in Brazil, and now one in New Zealand. The Manukau plant is 60% owned by US family firm Jack Links, and 40% by New Zealand's John Corner.