---
title: "Research excellence centres funding confirmed"
date: 2002-07-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14605
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Funding for the five specialist centres of research excellence (CoRE) chosen in March and criteria for the allocation of an additional $58 million provided for new centres in the May budget has now been confirmed, Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey said today.

The CoRE Fund was established in the 2001 Budget, with $60 million of operational and capital funding, to establish five specialist centres of research excellence. A further $38 million in operating funding, and $20 million for capital expenditure, was provided in this year's budget to create additional centres.

Steve Maharey said world-class research is fundamental to growing a more innovative New Zealand.

"The five successful Centres of Research Excellence (CoRE) selected in March will push the frontiers of knowledge in key areas vital for New Zealand's future. Final funding agreements have now been concluded with these centres by the Royal Society of New Zealand.

"The government has also determined how the additional $58 million provided in May's Budget for Centres of Research Excellence will be allocated. Part of the new funding ($9.46m over four years) will go to to-up funding provided to the CoREs already selected, while the remainder ($27.928m in operational funding and $20m for capital expenditure) will be used to fund at least two more additional centres.

"The six centres which were short-listed and visited by the selection committee but unsuccessful in the initial application round will be scrutinized again. Those to be funded in this second round will be chosen on the basis that they can improve their bids to better meet the existing criteria.

"The government expects to announce which centres have been successful in this second round in November, with funding negotiations concluded early in the New Year.

"The Centres of Research Excellence fund applications process has been a major driver of positive change in the tertiary education sector. It has brought together researchers from across the entire research sector and practically demonstrated what can be achieved when the sector pulls together," Steve Maharey said.

**Funding allocated to the Centres of Research Excellence**

- Allan Wilson Centre for Molecular Ecology and Evolution (hosted at Massey University and involving the universities of Auckland, Canterbury and Otago) will receive three year operational funding of $6.87m and a one-off $5.357m capital grant  
  Directors: Professors David Penny (06) 350 5033 and Mike Hendy (06) 350 7842;
- Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery (University of Auckland) will receive three year operational funding of $8.9m and a one-off $4.314m capital grant  
  Director: Professor Ted Baker (09) 373 7599 extn 4415;
- The MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Technology (hosted at Victoria University of Wellington and involving Canterbury and Otago universities and Industrial Research Ltd and the Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences) will receive three year operational funding of $13.39m and a one-off $9.8m capital grant)  
  Director: Professor Paul Callaghan (04) 463 5945;
- New Zealand Institute of Mathematics and its Applications (hosted at the University of Auckland and involving the New Zealand Mathematics Research Institute) will receive three year operational funding of $4.855m and a one-off $113,970 capital grant  
  Directors: Professors Vaughan Jones (based in California) and Marston Conder (09) 373 7599 extn 8879; and
- Nga Pae o te Maramatanga (Horizons of Insight) - The National Institute of Research Excellence for Maori Development and Advancement (hosted at the University of Auckland and involving Te Whare Wananga O Awanuiarangi, Te Wananga O Aotearoa, Te Wananga o Raukawa, Victoria University of Wellington and the universities of Otago and Waikato, Landcare Research and the Auckland Museum) will receive three year operational funding of $11.38m and a one-off capital grant of $382,000  
  Directors: Professor Linda Smith (09) 373 7599 extn 3964, and Associate Professor Michael Walker (09) 373 7599 extn 7008.