---
title: "Nurse practitioners join health workforce in New Zealand"
date: 2002-07-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14553
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King says District Health Boards and other providers now have the opportunity to employ a new type of health professional.

Ms King today launched the document Nurse Practitioners in New Zealand, which provides DHBs with the information they need to employ nurse practitioners.

"Nurse Practitioners in New Zealand will help health administrators and professionals think about ways of doing things differently by employing nurse practitioners.

"We already have the legal framework, the training programmes and our first-ever qualified nurse practitioner. Now we have a resource giving us some examples of ways in which nurse practitioners can practise, a description of how they are regulated, international evidence on their effectiveness, and other information which will help establish them as an important part of our health care workforce," she said.

Nurse Practitioners in New Zealand builds on last year's Innovations in Health conference, which profiled the nurse practitioner role, and is the basis for a series of regional roadshows co-hosted by the Ministry of Health and the Nursing Council.

"Nurse practitioners advocate health promotion and disease prevention. They look beyond treating the ailment and consider non-medical intervention and encourage self-care. They can also diagnose health problems and in some cases prescribe medication.”

Nurse practitioners complement the services offered by other health professionals, she said. "Collaboration is the key, and is central to the role of nurse practitioners. With greater collaboration between all health professions we will significantly improve the health and wellbeing of New Zealanders."

Ms King said the introduction of the nurse practitioner is one of many strategies to help retain nurses in clinical practice in New Zealand.

"While the nurse practitioner role has only recently been introduced in New Zealand, nurse practitioners have been practising overseas for many years. This has given us the opportunity to evaluate their role and the significant contribution they make. Some of the international evidence is documented in Nurse Practitioners in New Zealand."

For more information, contact Dionne Barton (04) 470 6851.  
Background

What is a nurse practitioner?  
A nurse practitioner is a registered nurse practising at an advanced level in a specific role who has a Masters level education and has been recognised and approved by the Nursing Council as a nurse practitioner. They are recognised as expert health care providers.

Where will nurse practitioners work?  
A nurse practitioner can work in any environment where health care is provided. They can work independently or with health professionals in hospitals, primary health organisations or anywhere in the community. They can treat everyone from the acutely ill to healthy people of all ages and their families/whanau, and will provide information to allow people to make informed decisions about their health care.

How will nurse practitioners work within the Primary Health Care Strategy?  
The nurse practitioner's population-based focus ties in well with the goals of the New Zealand Health Strategy, and the Primary Health Care Strategy.

What difference will nurse practitioners make?  
Changing health needs have increased demand for the expert nurse who coordinates between health providers, bridging hospital and community care. They will provide cost-effective access to health services through encouraging self-care and looking at non-medical intervention. They will also help chronically ill people manage their chronic illnesses and will span the boundaries between different services across health sectors.

Why would patients choose a nurse practitioner?  
They would choose a nurse practitioner because nurse practitioners are health professionals who: provide individualised care focusing not only on health problems but also the effects the problem has on people and their families/whanau; explain the details of health problems, medications and other topics to help people fully understand the best way to look after themselves and help them manage ongoing chronic illnesses and conditions better; and emphasise wellness and self-care by giving people the information they need to make healthy lifestyle choices and health care decisions.

Where can people get a copy of Nurse Practitioners in New Zealand?  
It will be widely distributed to District Health Boards and other health providers. Copies can be ordered through Wickliffe (04) 496 2200 or pubs@moh.govt.nz  
Copies will also be available on the Ministry's website www.moh.govt.nz

Where are the roadshows going to be?  
The Ministry is running a series of regional roadshows to provide information to DHBs and health providers to ensure nurse practitioners become an integral part of the health workforce, and their skills are fully utilised to contribute to improved health outcomes in a cost-effective way.

Roadshow dates and venues  
Auckland – 23 July 2pm-4pm, Lecture Theatre, 4th Floor, Auckland Hospital, Park Rd, Grafton, 6pm-8pm, Study Centre, Massey University, Albany Campus, Gate 1, Greville Rd, Albany

Bay of Plenty – 24 July 10am-12pm, Conference Room, Te Puke Kiwifruit Farm, State Highway 2, Te Puke

Hamilton – 25 July 9am-11am, Te Puna O Te Ora, 50 Colombo St, Frankton

Palmerston North – 31 July 2pm-4pm, Education Centre Hall, Midcentral DHB, Gate 1, Heretaunga St

Gisborne – 6 August 10am-12pm, Te Puna Waiora Board Room, Forrester House, Gisborne Hospital, 421 Ormond Rd

Hawke's Bay – 6 August 3pm-5pm, Education Centre, Hawke's Bay DHB, Omahau Rd

West Coast – 14 August 2pm-4pm, Ashley Conference Facilities, 74 Tasman St, Greymouth

Nelson-Marlborough – 15 August 9am-11am, Rivers Room, Trailways Motor Inn, 66 Trafalgar St, Nelson, 3pm-5pm – Conference Room, Blenheim Country Lodge Hotel, Cnr Alfred and Henry Sts, Blenheim

Wellington – 20 August 2pm-4pm, St John's Convention Centre, Willis St

Canterbury – 22 August 9am-11am, Rolleston Theatre, Christchurch Clinical School, Christchurch Hospital, Riccarton Ave, Christchurch, 2pm-4pm – Conference Room, Hibernian Hotel, 4 Latter St, Timaru

Otago – 23 August 10.30am-2.30pm and 2pm-4pm, University Lecture Hall, Dunedin Hospital, 201 Great King St, Dunedin

Southland – 29 August, venue TBA

Northland – date and venue TBA