---
title: "New State Houses for Pinehill"
date: 2002-07-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14439
ministers:
  - Tariana Turia
portfolios:
  - Housing
---

Acting Housing Minister Tariana Turia and Rimutaka Labour MP Paul Swain today announced that 70 new houses, including 20 new state houses, are to be built on Housing New Zealand land at Pinehill in Upper Hutt.

Mrs Turia said a proposal from a private developer has been accepted for 70 new houses to be built on the five-hectare site.

The proposal, which is subject to final contract negotiations, would see the area subdivided, and then Harwood Pacific Limited contracted to buy the sites and build the houses.

Housing New Zealand would buy about 20 of the homes within a pre-agreed price, and Harwood Pacific would sell the remaining 50 homes on the open market.

“This arrangement between Housing New Zealand and a private developer resulted from extensive community consultation,” said Tariana Turia. “It could become a model for other state housing areas,” she said.

Local MP Paul Swain said he was delighted with the announcement.

"This announcement is excellent news and will add to the very positive future outlook for Upper Hutt. The area is really moving ahead. Recently South Pacific Tyres announced that they are taking on more staff. The International School on the old CIT site is another exciting development,” he said

Housing NZ bought the former Rimutaka Prison staff housing village site in December 2000. The houses had mostly been empty for at least two years prior to purchase and were in a state of disrepair.

Mrs Turia said the Pinehill redevelopment project had involved extensive community consultation in the past year. It also required careful consideration by Government due to the complex nature of the commercial arrangements.

“The community consultation has included four public meetings and planning workshops. The community expressed their desire to avoid any concentration of state housing in the redevelopment.

“Housing New Zealand has listened to their views, and this development will see a mix of high quality state and private sector housing which is consistent with social housing objectives.

“Representatives of the neighbouring community have given their support to the Harwood Pacific proposal. This development will also complement the future use of the adjacent Central Institute of Technology campus, recently announced by Campus Group Holdings.

“In addition, the existing 36 houses, formerly owned by the Department of Corrections, appear to be suitable for relocation to other areas of high state housing need. They will be removed and assessed for refurbishment,” said Tariana Turia.

The exact destination of the existing houses is not yet known.