---
title: "Report to the Minister on reducing NCEA workload"
date: 2002-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14596
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

IN CONFIDENCE

19 July 2002

Minister of Education

Progress on initiatives to support the implementation of the NCEA

Proposal  
1This paper provides you with an update on activities to support the implementation of the NCEA.  
Background  
2In the letter you sent to the Ministry of Education on 9 July 2002 you indicated four areas of work for the Ministry and NZQA. You asked for an interim report by Friday 19 July.  
Comment  
3The key assumptions the agencies will work to in this project are:  
aWhen fully implemented the workload of a conscientious teacher should not be greater than what was required under the previous system;  
bThe NCEA needs to support good learning and teaching;  
cWe take an holistic approach which looks across implementation of the full programme at 3 levels and scholarship.  
4We will focus on three broad areas.  
§The management of the NCEA at the school level, including questions such as whether there is a need for every student to be assessed at every level of the NCEA for qualification purposes. Teachers and principals tell us that more discussion is needed about the nature and purpose of a qualification and the important things that a qualification signals.  
§How schools can support management of the NCEA at the classroom level, including practices relating to course size, assessment and reassessment. We would like to take up the idea of holding regional focus groups with Heads of Departments to identify and share their good current practice. The Ministry and the Qualifications Authority will then ensure that this information is easily available to all schools and teachers.  
§The ways in which improved support for schools and teachers can be provided from the Qualifications Authority and the Ministry. This would include further exemplar support, additional support from School Relationship Managers and more focused targeting of the work of the School Support Services Advisors.  
5Discussions with principals and teachers to date have identified significant variations in their practice and experiences this year. For example:  
aIn most schools, some departments and some teachers are very confident and quality assurance checks confirm sound to very good practice. In one case a principal identified that the English department was working well, but the Science department was struggling. A second principal identified that in his school the reverse was the case. Often the level of confidence relates to previous experience with standards-based assessment.  
bPrincipals and teachers indicate that it needs to be remembered that the previous system did not encourage teachers to exercise their professionalism to anywhere near the extent the new system allows. It will therefore take time for all teachers to develop the full range of skills and confidence to do this.  
cSchools have put in place much more rigorous processes to support students and provide guidance to teachers, but again the practice varies. In some schools the material is relatively concise and focussed on guidance, in others it takes the form of large manuals which set out in-school requirements, but sometimes confuse rather than clarify.  
dSome schools expect every student to attempt all available achievement standards in a subject while others are encouraging students and teachers to focus on a smaller range, and use their time more flexibly.  
eSome schools are thinking about how they can guide students toward pathways to the best possible school-leaver qualification. There is no need for a student to undertake all three levels simply for the purposes of gaining interim qualifications.  
fSome schools and teachers tell very positive stories of student engagement. Students have welcomed the transparency and looked to engage with teachers on the interpretation of standards and the areas of learning and skills they should concentrate on. Students who previously viewed themselves as failures under the old system now feel positive that they have already earned credits, and banked them towards a qualification.  
gOther schools and teachers report the opposite. Some students have become dispirited when they have not achieved at the level of the standard early in the school year. Others have not had their expectations of ‘achieved with excellence’ results met. This reinforces the importance of teacher judgement as to the readiness of students to be assessed, and important role of informative feedback to students during the teaching programme.  
hMany note that the NCEA with its greater transparency represents a shift in ‘control’ toward the student. Students are potentially much better informed than they were previously and are likely to want to engage in greater discussion about standards, expectations and pathways. The same is likely to be true of parents. While this is seen as a very positive shift by many principals and teachers it does represent a new set of demands and possibly skills for some teachers.  
iMany teachers are valuing the greater responsibility for professional judgements. However there are understandable concerns to ensure that differences in approaches between teachers or across schools are acceptable in the context of national moderation.  
6We have written this week to schools regarding the agencies’ response to your directive and outlined the initial steps we will be taking. The work ahead will look to build a shared understanding of the reasons and practices behind the differences described above. It will look to identify good practice examples from the sector, and to facilitate professional dialogue, discussion and debate. We will look to disseminate widely examples of practice and experience that are proving effective. We will also look to provide assurance about practices and judgements where this is relevant.  
7A more detailed work programme, focusing on how the Ministry and the Qualifications Authority will look to provide more support for schools and teachers is attached.

Identify strategies that schools and teachers could use to manage the overall workload for teachers and students

Communication with teachers and schools is often most effective if done face to face. This is because the issues are very different for individual schools, departments and teachers.Activity: Convene NCEA Meetings for Heads of Departments in Schools  
Outcomes Sought Proposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Wide dissemination of good practice developed within schools will enable all to build from such work to reduce workload.RationaleHeads of departments have a crucial role in NCEA implementation. The recently convened principals’ meeting suggested that the Ministry and NZQA meet with heads of departments. This has been discussed with PPTA who agree it is desirable.The convening of regional focus group meetings of heads of departments to identify good practice and solutions to issues proving difficult in some schools would complement the earlier meetings with principals and HODs. Impact: Such meetings would provide opportunities for issues relating to the management of teacher workload, curriculum and assessment, and other elements necessary for implementation of NCEA at Level 1 and 2 to be discussed, and solutions shared. The meetings would provide access to models of good practice for managing NCEA implementation. 1.Work with national and regional teacher and principal bodies to identify venues and nominees to be invited meeting. Arrange logistics and resources for focus groups – MOE/NZQA.2.Regional focus groups held before the end of August – MOE/NZQA.3.Communication of resulting good practice information both general and targeted by subjects as generated at the meetings - NZQA/MOE.

Activity: ICT and Software SupportInvestigate the quality and adequacy of current ICT and software arrangements and make improvements where necessary.

Outcomes SoughtProposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Effective use of ICT and quality software will provide appropriate administrative support. RationaleThere is some evidence that software for keeping information about students’ achievement and providing information to NZQA is not meeting schools’ needs.Identification of schools with problems with software systems used in school management of the NCEA.Development of strategies to address issues.Impact: Schools would value this support. 1.Clarification of issues with users – MOE/NZQA.2.Identification of options for addressing issues identified. §short term – MOE/NZQA§medium term – develop standards for school administration software - MOE in consultation with NZQA.3.Meet with software providers - NZQA.

Provide guidance for teachers about the amount and nature of assessment required for the purposes of students getting good school qualifications

The Ministry of Education and the Qualifications Authority are planning to consult with school advisors and to identify main types of support needed. They will also prepare action plans for providing supporting materials.Activity: Provide a more targeted service to schools by School Support Services  
Outcomes soughtProposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Access to appropriate targeted support at the school, departmental and subject level will improve teacher understanding and confidence.Rationale School Support Services advisors have been appointed in six regions to assist schools with NCEA implementation. They are an important source of on-the-spot advice to schools. An analysis of the type of support being requested by schools to determine ways in which School Support Services advisors might better provide support to address schools’ needs. Consideration could also be given to ways in which commonly requested advice could be addressed through the provision of support materials for schools. This support would be in collaboration with the School Relationship Managers.Impact: Increased teacher support targeted at areas of need. Access to high quality materials could be expected to improve the responsiveness of the support.1.Identify main types of support requested by schools – MOE/NZQA.2.Analyse milestone reports from School Support services to identify support needed – MOE.3.Identify ways of providing support and convey to School Support services - MOE/NZQA.4.Convene regional meetings of School Relationship Managers and School Support Service advisors - NZQA/MOE.

Activity: Increase the number of School Relationship ManagersThrough School Relationship Managers’ visits to schools and the www.ncea.govt.nz website examples of effective practice can be shared to ensure that the assessment of student performance for qualifications is both manageable and relevant. NZQA will commence the process for appointment of additional School Relationship Managers next week.  
Outcomes soughtProposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Access to individualised advice with respect to assessment systems will build school confidence and capability.RationaleThe School Relationship Managers undertake systems checks of schools internal and external assessment. They provide advice about systems to support the implementation of the NCEA customised to individual school needs.Increase the number of School Relationship Managers by up to 8 with more focused individualised advice to middle and senior managers in schools.Impact: Increased support for schools who require assistance.1. NZQA to appoint and train as quickly as possible – NZQA.2. Prepare Cabinet paper re funding – MOE.3. In consultation with schools, ensure that the services provided meet their needs – NZQA.

Develop a range of initiatives to improve communications between the Ministry, NZQA, and schools

The object of this is to ensure that all communications by the agencies are consistent and focus on clarity of messages and understanding. They should also ensure that all parties have common expectations and understandings. The Qualifications Authority in consultation with the Ministry of Education has drafted a strategy. This strategy addresses the general public, education professionals and employers as a target groups and includes:  
§authoritative statements contributing to the public debate;§scenarios of good practice at subject level;§management at school level;§ideas on student programmes for qualifications;§materials for students and their care givers;§letters from the Secretary for Education and Acting CEO NZQA to teachers, principals and boards;§letters to publications responding to incorrect or misleading information; and§developing ways to report on the outcomes of the heads of department focus group meetings.  
Activity: Active communications strategy regarding the NCEA  
Outcomes Sought Proposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Common understanding and expectations of the NCEA by students, teachers, school communities, and employers will enable teachers to focus on the core business of quality teaching.Rationale Information about NCEA implementation has tended to focus on details and not the broader principles and philosophy or the benefits to students.The good progress that is being made with the implementation of the NCEA is not being represented.Further revision of the NCEA Communications Strategy to address target groups.This could include:§letters from the Secretary for Education, and the Acting CEO NZQA to schools §mini case studies of good practice§authoritative statements contributing to public debate ensuring correct information base.Key outcomes include:§that all parties have common expectations and understandings§assurance about the professional judgements being exercised. 1.Update identification of key issues for each stakeholder group – students, teachers, principals, parents, tertiary providers, employers, wider public – NZQA/MOE.2.Update identification of outcomes desired for each group and most appropriate form of communication for each group - NZQA/MOE.3.Continue to develop materials as required for each stakeholder group with a focus on clarity of messages and understanding - NZQA/MOE.4.Develop ways to report on the outcomes of the heads of department focus group meetings - NZQA/MOE.

Activity: Develop systems that enable the easier discovery of NCEA materials on websites The Ministry of Education, TKI and the Qualifications Authority are collaborating on the medium term issues around the use of all these websites. The Qualifications Authority has initiated a project to address issues of document download time, search engine and navigation on the website www.ncea.govt.nz.A series of potential solutions to the downloading issues are being resolved although it is important to note that this will not help if users rely on low-function technology and limited telecommunications band width.  
Outcomes soughtProposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Easy and rapid internet access to information and resources will enable teachers to make the best use of the material developed. Rationale Document download, search engine and navigation need improvement to facilitate access and communication. Improve the search engine facility. Develop plan to address document download and navigation issues.Impact: This would save teacher time and frustration.1.Joint meeting to discuss issues – NZQA/MOE.2.Prepare paper listing problems and solutions - NZQA/MOE.3.Immediately address problems able to be solved in the short term - NZQA/MOE.4.Significantly redevelop website to address long term issues - NZQA/MOE.

Collection and dissemination of practices that schools and teachers have found to be effective

In the course of its work, the Qualifications Authority identifies effective programmes that schools are offering students this year. This will include interviewing heads of departments on effective practice of assessment for qualifications. The Ministry of Education through the advisory services and the Qualifications Authority through its Schools Relationship Managers are in a position to identify examples of good subject specific material. The availability of a larger number of exemplars in areas where there are currently fewer would reduce the time that teachers are currently spending on modifying existing ones or developing new ones. It is proposed to advertise in the Education Gazette for schools to submit exemplars that been developed and used within schools and publish them on the websites. The focus here will be on reconfirming sensible assessment practice as well as on providing sample activities.Activity : Purchase of further internal and external assessment exemplars  
Outcomes soughtProposed solutionImplementation Outline  
Access to sound assessment exemplars will reconfirm teacher confidence in the design and adaptation of assessment activities to meet the needs of individual programmes.RationaleThe Ministry of Education has developed assessment exemplars for each of the internally assessed achievement standards.NZQA has developed one assessment exemplar for each of the externally assessed achievement standards. Some schools have already used this exemplar for mid-year assessment purposes.MOE, NZQA and School Support Services would be asked to identify schools that have developed sound assessment exemplars. These exemplars would be purchased from the schools by the Ministry/NZQA and accessed by schools through the NCEA website. Impact: The availability of a larger number of exemplars in areas where there are currently few available would reduce the time that teachers are currently spending on modifying existing ones or developing new ones. The ongoing need for this initiative will be assessed as implementation proceeds.1.MOE/NZQA to ask NZQA School Relationship Managers, Moderators and School Support Services to identify schools with sound assessment practices and potential exemplars – MOE/NZQA.2.Education Gazette Notice and letters to selected schools inviting them to send potential exemplars to MOE for quality checks and acceptance by 3/8 – MOE/NZQA.3.Payments to be made to schools for selected exemplars – MOE/NZQA.