---
title: "Government tables offer to secondary teachers"
date: 2002-07-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14488
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard today confirmed that the government has tabled an offer to PPTA members in response to the claim tabled on 21 June.

Trevor Mallard said that a Ministerial group approved $13 million extra funding yesterday.

The new offer is for a shorter period and includes a response to teacher concerns around financial recognition of the new work associated with the introduction of the NCEA. The proposal is to introduce fixed term NCEA Implementation Units valued at $1,000 per annum for the 2002 and 2003 school years.

“The Government’s proposal acknowledges that the new work associated with the introduction of the NCEA will fall unevenly within schools. The unit approach is preferable to a flat-rate allowance with set criteria as it provides schools with the flexibility to reflect differences in NCEA related workload pressures. Schools can, for instance, target a greater number of units to heads of department positions to reflect the greater responsibility these positions entail for the introduction of the NCEA.”

“Other core aspects of the package include non-contact time, a 3.5% increase , a commitment to extra staffing and the establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Secondary Teacher Remuneration.

“This is a good offer. Since the second settlement reached in May with the PPTA executive was rejected by their membership, we have listened to concerns voiced by school trustees, principals and teachers.

“An NCEA forum organised by the Ministry of Education and the PPTA was extremely constructive to this process and I would like that level of discussion to continue so we can look at ways to reduce teacher workload outside of the negotiation process,” Trevor Mallard said.

The Minister rubbished Opposition claims that the election was impacting on the government’s efforts to seek a resolution.

“It has always been my view that this is an education and fiscal issue – not a political issue. My colleagues and I are getting a clear impression from the public that they want this dispute sorted out, but not at any cost. We certainly share that view,” Trevor Mallard said.

Key Elements of the Offer

·Term from settlement to 30 April 2003.  
·2% increase to base salary and unit rates backdated to 11 July 2001.  
·A further 1.5% increase to base salary and unit rates with effect from 10 July 2002.  
·19,000 “NCEA Implementation Units” of $1000 each for the 2002 and 2003 school years. These units are divisible by 2 and can be allocated in multiples.  
·Non-contact time for full time teachers – 3 non-contact hours in 2002 and 2003, 4 non-contact hours in 2004 and endeavour for 5 non-contact hours in 2005.  
·0.1 time allowance (2.5 hours per week release time) for full-time year 2 beginning teachers from date of settlement.  
·Intention to implement staffing improvements based on recommendations of School Staffing Review Group by beginning of 2007 school year and endeavour to implement by beginning of 2006 school year.  
·High Priority Teacher Supply Allowance of $2500 per annum ($1500 per annum for provisionally registered teachers) for teachers in those areas designated as hard to staff.  
·Increase in the Mäori Immersion Teacher Allowance from $1500 per annum to the value of one unit ($2847 per annum).  
·Provision of unpaid refreshment leave of up to one year. Accrues as service for salary purposes.  
·Five additional full-time study awards for teachers who are Mäori  
·Improvements to the removal and transfer expenses provisions including an increase for teachers relocating to their first permanent position from a 50% reimbursement to full coverage.  
·Establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Secondary Teacher Remuneration to examine and report on the impact on remuneration of secondary teacher supply, demand, qualifications, curriculum delivery, workload and other directly related issues.