---
title: "National's accountancy would make even Enron blush"
date: 2002-07-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14563
ministers:
  - Michael Cullen
portfolios:
  - Finance
---

17 July 2002Media Statement  
Embargoed to 4pmNational’s accounting would make Enron blush

“The National Party’s accounting would make even Enron executives blush,” Finance Minister Michael Cullen said today.

“It is fortunate National has no prospect of winning government as they would blow holes in the Crown accounts and destroy New Zealand’s hard won reputation for fiscal prudence.

“National is claiming that they can finance their tax and spending promises by scrapping the New Zealand Superannuation Fund. They also maintain that they would reduce government spending to below 30 percent of GDP and reduce gross debt to below 25 percent.

“This is fiscal nonsense. The money simply cannot be made to stretch as far as National is trying to stretch it without resorting to Enron-style fiddles,” Dr Cullen said.

“For example, National seems to be assuming that the indicative allocations of around $500 million provided in the budget for 2003-04 and outyears are fully available for new spending initiatives. In fact they have to cover salary increases for police, teachers, prison officers and the like and such unanticipated expenditures as biosecurity responses to mosquito and moth incursions and the increase in border protection after the foot and mouth outbreak in Europe.

“Our figures show that - even assuming a state sector wage freeze and no unexpected events requiring a fiscal response - National’s policies would outstrip Labour’s Super Fund contributions by at least $1.5 billion in Year Four and that the gap would widen over time.

“National will be hard put to quarrel with our costings because wherever possible, we have used their own cost assessments. Where these were not provided, we have been deliberately conservative in our estimates and where the policy is too vague to be costed in any meaningful way at all, we have left it out.

“National’s reaction to persistent poor polls has been to fight this campaign like a minor party; promising the earth in the secure knowledge that they will never be in a position to deliver. In the process, they have done severe damage to their own credibility and have debased the standard of political debate in this country,” Dr Cullen said.

Contact: Patricia Herbert \[press secretary] 04-471-9412 or 021-270-9013.