---
title: "Report on reducing NCEA workload released"
date: 2002-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14606
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard has received a report that shows there are practical and realistic ways to reduce workload associated with the implementation of the National Certificate of Educational Achievement.

Trevor Mallard had directed the Ministry of Education to develop initiatives aimed at reducing workload following growing concern that the new system was creating too much extra work for teachers.

"The basis I have worked on is that once the NCEA is fully implemented, the workload of a conscientious teacher should not be greater than was required under the previous system," Trevor Mallard said.

"The Ministry has worked with the New Zealand Qualifications Authority and has written to schools outlining initial steps they are taking, as well as providing me with a much more detailed work programme to achieve my objective.

"Their plans include practical ways to share good practice, better ICT and software provision, and more direct support to schools.

"This needs to be considered in light of initiatives that have already been announced recently including extra teachers in schools and more professional development.

"NCEA offers a challenge that, if the right support is available, has the potential to be rewarding to both teachers and students. It needs to support good teaching and learning rather than detract from it. The government wants to work with the sector to make this a reality," Trevor Mallard said.