---
title: "BOT appointed for new Hamilton primary school"
date: 2002-07-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14587
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The establishment board of trustees appointed for the new primary school in Rototuna is set to add an exciting level to the school network in Hamilton.

Five Hamilton North residents were selected for Rototuna Primary School - opening for the 2003 school year.

The board members are (in alphabetical order):  
Megan Campbell  
Shirley McKay  
Ngahuia Nuri  
Mike Slack  
Kim Wisnewski-Smith

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said nominations for the board were called for at a well-attended public meeting and through local advertisements. Nominations were also sought from local schools, Hamilton North residents, early childhood groups, community groups, the territorial local authority, and local MPs.

“The members of the board were chosen because of the skills and backgrounds that each will bring to the establishment of the school. It’s also good to ensure the board reflects the local community and has an appropriate mix of experiences.”

The board will appoint the principal and other staff, as well as determining policy for the school and putting in place sound governance practices.

“Rototuna Primary School is going to be a real asset to the North East suburbs. It’s an area that is growing rapidly and I know the school will be warmly welcomed by the people of Hamilton City."

It will cater for primary-aged children in the developing areas of Hamilton North and will take pressure off neighbouring schools.

Rototuna is the first primary school to open in Hamilton since Crawshaw Primary in 1987. Te Rapa Primary was relocated to a new site in 1997.