---
title: "Minister welcomes secondary teacher decision"
date: 2002-07-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14613
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard has welcomed the decision by secondary teachers to enter into alternative dispute resolution as a way of breaking the impasse in the collective agreement negotiations.

“It means that all students will be back in class tomorrow and we have a positive way forward to resolving the secondary teachers’ dispute,” Trevor Mallard said.

“The government has reached two settlements with the PPTA which were rejected by its members. A further offer was rejected outright. The government has moved significantly in that time but we are still worlds apart from the current PPTA claim.

“This alternative dispute resolution is a win-win situation for teachers. The government has agreed to accept the recommendations from the independent panel, but we also accept that the PPTA has a process that means they would have to take any recommendations to members for ratification.

“Alternative dispute resolution was first raised in negotiations at the end of last month. It is a process that the government has agreed to in the best interest of education. Since that time the Ministry and the PPTA negotiators have jointly developed and agreed terms of reference and agreed on the independent panel. The panel consists of - former Tawa College principal Bruce Murray, former Assistant Commissioner of Industrial Relations (State Services Commission) Doug Martin and former public service CEO Dame Margaret Bazley who will chair the panel.”

“The panel is likely to meet for the first time early next week. The Ministry of Education and the PPTA will make submissions to the panel which will make their final recommendation within three weeks. The panel has the facility to ask for further information from both parties if needed. The School Trustees Association will have the opportunity to put its point of view with the Ministry submission.

“At the same time, the government is continuing its work to reduce NCEA workload outside of the collective agreement process. The Ministry of Education and the New Zealand Qualifications Authority reported to me for the first time last week on initiatives in this area. They are now going to report to me fortnightly on the implementation of those initiatives and other ideas to reduce workload,” Trevor Mallard said.