---
title: "Minister still waiting for National support for new prison"
date: 2002-07-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14478
ministers:
  - Matt Robson
portfolios:
  - Corrections
---

“I look forward to Bill English’s support for the new regional prison which might be build in his electorate of Clutha/Southland, Corrections Minister, Matt Robson says.

“I’m sure he’ll take a more sensible position than his National Party colleague, Dr Paul Hutchison who has led the protests against a new regional prison in his electorate south of Auckland.”

Matt Robson is visiting the proposed site for the new prison today at Milburn, close to the town of Milton.

This is the strongest site option so far, although no final decision will be made until a detailed investigation of the site has occurred and local people have had a chance to have their say.

“This government has just introduced the Sentencing and Parole Acts which will see the worst offenders locked up for longer – whatever the National/Act parties say.

“Because of that legislation, the prison population is going to increase by around 300 inmates, and that’s partly why we need new prisons.

“If you’re anti-prison, you can’t be anti-crime.

“I will continue to promote regional prisons over the old slop-bucket prisons because they work better. That’s why I’m happy to be closing an old prison like Dunedin, and Mt Eden won’t be far behind.

“Regional prisons – keeping offenders close to family and their communities - is the best way of reducing re-offending when offenders are released back into the community.

“Prison protestors, National’s s Dr Paul Hutchison and Act’s Muriel Newman need to get real. If you want longer sentences, you’re going to need more prisons. You can’t have it both ways.