---
title: "Hutt South school gains funding for homework centre"
date: 2002-07-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14526
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Hutt South MP Trevor Mallard is delighted that The Arakura Samoan Parents Charitable Trust Incorporated – part of Arakura School - is receiving $7,000 for a new study support centre.

This study support centre will attract around 31 students from around the community with a general focus on reading, mathematics and homework.

There are now 121 study support/homework centres being supported around New Zealand, since the initiative's development in October 2000 - budget allocation in 2000 was $7.5 million over four years.  
Some of the homework centres, like the one situated at Arakura School, are within schools. Some are supervised centres within community facilities while a few are virtual centres making use of 0800 numbers and the internet to link students who need study assistance.

“Study Support Centres are a simple idea and one that I have found particularly satisfying. They provide a quiet place, resources, a registered teacher, information technology and all the basics necessary to develop good study habits among children at risk of education under-achievement,” Trevor Mallard said.

“These centres have the potential to raise the educational achievements of thousands of students.

"It’s really important that children gain good study skills and habits before they reach secondary school. Many children's home circumstances do not support this for a range of reasons.

“The centres are aimed at assisting senior primary school students (year 5 to year 8) in some of our lower decile schools. The initiative particularly targets decile 1-3 schools or community groups who will draw in many students from these schools to attend the homework centres.

"Centres of this type used to operate on an ad hoc basis. There have been some wonderful success stories and we are now helping to establish more as well as supporting existing centres which often run under great uncertainty.

"These study support centres are an exciting initiative which I hope communities throughout the country get behind and enjoy," Trevor Mallard said.