---
title: "Labour Focus on Pacific Economic Development"
date: 2002-07-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14570
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Pacific Island Affairs
---

Labour is pledging a strong focus on economic development, as well as greater support for Pacific languages and culture, in its Pacific policy released today.

Launching the policy at the Pacific Economic Symposium in Auckland Pacific Island Affairs Minister Mark Gosche said that Labour was particularly keen to foster the growth and showcasing of Pacific music, fashion, performing arts and culture.

“I am looking to the Pacific Business Trust to take the lead in making that happen. To help the government last year increased the Trust’s loans portfolio by $500,000. As a result the trust assisted about 1000 Pacific business people or companies last year, through incubation programmes, venture funding and business advice.

“If re-elected Labour will look at further expanding assistance for Pacific peoples to develop their own businesses through the trust and other regional economic initiatives. We also want to see Pacific peoples’ economic aspirations incorporated into future regional development strategies funded and supported by the Ministry for Economic Development.

Mr Gosche said over 100,000 new jobs created under the Labour-led government, and 16,000 of these had gone to Pacific workers, increasing the number of Pacific peoples in employment by 22 percent in only two years.

“At the same time there has been a 20 per cent drop in the Pacific unemployment rate under this Labour-led government.”

Education is the key to ensuring Pacific peoples participate in and benefit from New Zealand’s future economic growth, Mr Gosche told the Symposium.

“With Labour’s commitment to doubling the number of Modern Apprenticeships, more needs to be done to ensure Pacific peoples

Hon Mark GoscheMember of Parliament for MaungakiekieMinister of Pacific Island Affairs

17 July 2002  
Labour Focus on Pacific Economic Development

make the most of those training opportunities. Labour is committed to strategies to increase the take up of Modern Apprenticeships, fellowships and formal work place training.”

As well as fostering economic development, Labour wants to give greater support to Pacific languages.

“The value of preserving our culture cannot be quantified in economic terms but it is vital to Pacific peoples’ future. A growing number of Pacific youth are unable to speak their own language.

“Labour is committed to supporting Pacific languages. If re-elected we will investigate the potential for a Pacific Language Commission to assist in fostering these languages, particularly for the 60 percent of Pacific people born in New Zealand.

“We also plan to develop a co-ordinated strategy for Pacific broadcasting, and to explore how we can get more Pacific programmes on mainstream television.”

Labour’s other Pacific plans for its second term include:

·continuing to promote the development of “Pacific for Pacific” services in the delivery of health, social services and education.  
·helping more Pacific children into quality early childhood education with a range of initiatives including working to achieve the goals of the Pasifika Education Plan, released last year  
·implementing the Pacific component of the Tertiary Education Strategy to encourage greater Pacific achievement in all forms of tertiary learning  
·promote Pacific involvement in science and technology  
·promoting Pacific representation at all levels of government decision making, including government-appointed boards and within government departments  
·promoting health programmes for Pacific women and children, including actively encouraging Pacific women to use national breast and cervical cancer screening services  
·ensuring New Zealand’s Official Development Assistance programme continues to have a major focus on the Pacific

A full copy of the Pacific policy can be viewed at www.labour.org.nz