---
title: "Hawke Bay mussel farm gets go-ahead from Conservation Minister"
date: 2002-07-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14479
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

Conservation Minister Sandra Lee has approved a resource consent for a 2465 hectare mussel farm in Hawke Bay. She has granted the consent for a term of 30 years to Napier Mussels Limited to enable the company to undertake the staged development of a mussel farm.  
Ms Lee?s consent as Minister of Conservation was required because large marine farms are a restricted coastal activity. She has set conditions requiring greater safeguards to reduce the chance of whales and other marine mammals becoming entangled in the mussel farm structures.  
She said Hawke Bay was frequented by the endangered southern right whale and by humpback whales as they migrated between their feeding grounds in the Southern Ocean and their breeding grounds in the South Pacific. The Bay was also of international significance as a breeding ground for pygmy sperm whales.  
Ms Lee said while the population status of the southern right whale was currently under investigation, early indications suggested that it could be one of the rarest marine mammal populations in the world.  
The additional conditions set by the Minister include requirements for consultation with the Department of Conservation on the development of an environmental monitoring programme, Regional Council approval of a marine mammal entanglement contingency plan, and a requirement to adopt best practice technology or methods to avoid or reduce the chances of marine mammal entanglement.  
In granting the resource consent the Minister noted that she expected Napier Mussels Limited and the Hawke Bay Regional Council to take all necessary steps during the life of the consent to ensure that marine mammals were not endangered by the marine farm structure. The mussel farm is to be developed in stages, with the consent of the Hawke Bay Regional Council required before each stage of expansion is undertaken. The Council will need to be satisfied that the marine farm is not having an adverse effect on the environment.  
Ms Lee said that it was important in the development of New Zealand?s aquaculture industry that marine mammals were not put at risk.