---
title: "Inaugural public sector qualifications presented"
date: 2002-07-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14441
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

E-learning gets the thumbs up from the first graduates of the new Public Sector Knowledge qualification.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard today presented three graduates with these inaugural certificates for the Change Training public sector course – ‘Knowledge 1: The very civil servant’

These innovative on line training courses comprise a ‘public sector driver’s licence’ and have only been available since late last year. People from a wide range of ministries and departments are showing interest in the qualification as well as people seeking to work in the public sector.

“We need more skilled staff in the Public Service and effective training courses are a great opportunity for people to increase their learning and develop their careers,” Trevor Mallard said.

The ‘Knowledge 1’ training course enables Public Service staff to understand more about how the State sector works. The online course, which is NZQA registered and PSTO accredited, is an example of positive collaboration between a private sector education provider and industry organisations.

“The students who graduate from this course will have learnt some fundamentals about the New Zealand system of government – such as the functions of central and local government, the Public Service code of conduct, the Treaty of Waitangi, the New Zealand legal system and public finance principles.

“What is interesting is that the majority of the interactions with students are carried out online.

“Online education offers great opportunities for Public Service staff, as the training is not restricted to people in particular geographic locations. This means more frontline and regional staff can take part in upskilling programmes.”

Certificates were presented to:

·Kerryn Mitchell, Department of Conservation  
·Michael Hampl, CEG, Department of Labour  
·Donna Turuwhenua, Public Sector Training Organisation

The Public Sector Knowledge courses are available free to New Zealand citizens and residents over 18 years of age. For more information go to www.change.co.nz.