---
title: "Prebble misleading yet again over Victims of Crime survey"
date: 2002-07-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14489
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

Mr Prebble yet again is lying to the public, Justice Minister Phil Goff said.

“His claim today that the Ministry of Justice is refusing to release a five-yearly survey of victims is untrue.

“The Ministry has advised me –  
“I can assure you that the Ministry is not in possession of any data from the survey, and has received no written or oral communication from the market research company or the independent researcher as to the content of the data or any trends in it.”

“Mr Prebble’s statement that ACT has been told that the survey reveals that violent crime in New Zealand is now higher than in the US is a blatant invention.

“He cannot have been told this because as he was advised by the Ministry the completed survey results do not currently exist.

“Mr Prebble has been caught out lying time and again.

“The research work on comparable crime statistics produced by the Ministry (International Comparisons of Recorded Violent Crime Rates for 2000) and published on its website www.justice.govt.nz demonstrates that the rate of violent crime per head of population is in fact four times higher in the US than in New Zealand, 44 percent higher in Canada, 13 percent higher in England and Wales and only in Australia is it lower (9.8 percent).

“This research endeavoured to the extent possible to compare like with like in the reported statistics from each country.

“New Zealand Police statistics produced independently of Government show that crime last year in New Zealand fell to a 13-year low. Last week, FBI statistics suggested that at the same time, US crime rose by 2 percent.

“Mr Prebble’s statement utterly lacks credibility. Once again, he is simply making it up,” Mr Goff said.