---
title: "Hawke’s Bay food industry gets major regional boost"
date: 2002-07-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14476
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

“Hawke’s Bay is destined to be a world-class powerhouse in food production, processing and exporting,” said Industry and Regional Development Minister Jim Anderton.

At today’s launch of the Food Hawke’s Bay Regional Initiative, Jim Anderton announced $2 million in funding from Industry New Zealand’s Regional Partnerships Programme to establish Hawke’s Bay as a food-processing Centre of Excellence.

“Today’s announcement shows the value of Industry New Zealand and its commitment to developing the regions of New Zealand by working in partnership with them to build on their strengths.

“This funding will help create a partnership between the food-processing industry, education, research and the local community.

“Building these partnerships will help increase the rate of positive growth in the regions of New Zealand.”

Food Hawke’s Bay is the initiative of the local economic development agency Vision 2020 and involves the food industry, the Eastern Institute of Technology, iwi, and local councils.

A further $980,000 will be funded by local industry and EIT.

Jim Anderton stressed the importance of producing value-added goods for the overseas market.

“Hawke’s Bay has traditional strengths in agriculture and the manufacturing sector. The initiative will help the region take advantage of the significant opportunities that exist to convert primary produce into higher value products and exports.

“The initiative will generate economic and social benefits for the whole Hawke’s Bay region. Food Hawke’s Bay estimates an additional $60.4 million in GDP, $93.1 million in exports, and 646 jobs can be generated in five years.

“In ten years, Hawke’s Bay will be a top performer in global food production, processing and exporting.

“With funding from Industry New Zealand, Food Hawke’s Bay will develop food industry clusters plus a Centre of Innovation based at EIT. These initiatives will apply better skills, technology and innovation to help create new and higher-value food products and greater competitive advantage.

“The clusters will focus on the transfer of production capacity from existing companies to local SMEs, adding value and growing export volumes in the food industry throughout the region, stimulating new product development and improving food industry training and education.

“The Food Hawke’s Bay Centre of Innovation will be established at EIT to spark innovation in product development and will be accessible to students and the industry. The Centre will also provide sensory and testing services, small batch capability for food processing and wine making.

“Local iwi have been consulted and support the initiative. Tom Mulligan of Ngati Kahungunu has been appointed to represent Iwi on the Food Hawke’s Bay Governance Group.

“Maori are an important employment group in the food industry. Improved capability, training and employment will further enhance Maori economic development in the region.

“New Zealand cannot have a strong national economy unless we have strong regional economies. This significant boost to developing the Hawke’s Bay economy shows the government’s commitment to growing stronger regions,” Jim Anderton said.

The Food Hawke’s Bay Board:

Chris BainPort of Napier Limited (Chair)  
Neville CameronHeinz Wattie’s Australasia  
John LoughlinRichmond Limited  
Ian LawsonTe Awa Farm Ltd  
Claire VogtherrHolly Bacon Limited/HB Food Group  
Tom MulliganNgati Kahungunu  
Bruce MartinEastern Institute of Technology  
Lawrence YuleMayor of Hastings (Representing 5 Territorial Local Authorities)

Media Enquiries:  
Jenny Alexander \[press secretary] 021 99 55 75, 04 471 9172  
email: Jenny.Alexander@parliament.govt.nz  
http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/anderton/index.html

About Industry New Zealand’s Regional Partnerships Programme

Industry New Zealand’s Regional Partnerships Programme aims to help regions to realise their potential. The Programme is not about grants for one-off initiatives. Funding goes to proposals developed by “communities of interest”, working together for long-term sustainable growth for their region.

Successful proposals will involve a cross section of agencies and organisations such as business groups, local government, iwi, economic development agencies and community groups, implementing an agreed strategy.

Co-operation rather than competition is the key – between regional stakeholders and the government.

The Programme provides funding for:  
§Up to $100,000 per region for strategic planning  
§Up to $100,000 each year for building the necessary capability to implement strategic plans  
§Up to $2 million for Major Regional Initiatives.

Regions are also required to contribute to funding, and progression to the next stage is not automatic or guaranteed.