---
title: "Labour’s commitment to Auckland"
date: 2002-07-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14557
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

Judith Tizard today praised the work of the Auckland Regional Growth Forum over the past three years in coordinating solutions to address the region’s growth.

Attending a meeting of the Auckland Regional Growth Forum today, the Auckland Central MP and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister with Auckland Issues congratulated all those in regional and local government in Auckland who have come together regularly to work in partnership on Auckland’s issues.

“Three years ago Prime Minister Helen Clark and I attended the launch of the Auckland Regional Growth Strategy, Land Transport Strategy, and Passenger Transport Action Plan.

“This was the first time in 25 years that Auckland developed forward-looking strategies that provided a vision for the future and a commitment to work in partnership with each other, with Auckland’s communities and with the government to ensure Auckland gets its fair share of infrastructure and development money.

“Helen Clark promised that a Labour-led government would assist Auckland to implement these strategies to manage growth.

“In the last three years we have seen massive improvements in public transport, huge progress on roading planning, and the most recent round of Transfund funding saw Auckland get its fair share at last.

“We recognise that while transport infrastructure is Auckland’s greatest problem, the region now accepts that it must work to play a much greater part in New Zealand’s economic growth as well.

“Work has already moved ahead on the Auckland Regional Economic Development Strategy, which the government supported with Industry New Zealand funding of almost $500,000, and we have also supported the Competitive Auckland project,” Judith Tizard said.

“I’m delighted that the relationship between local and central government on Auckland’s plans to manage growth has been so positive and I look forward to continuing to work together to translate more of those plans into reality.

“Labour is determined to go on working with Auckland to make sure that the region remains a great place to live as well as a great place to earn New Zealand’s living.

“The Labour-led government has been the best government for Auckland, ever,” says Judith Tizard. “No other government has worked with Auckland to deal with its pressing regional growth issues in the way this government has.”