---
title: "Chronology of Secondary Teachers’ Negotiations 2001-2002 (at 4 July 2002)"
date: 2002-07-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14534
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Chronology of Secondary Teachers’ Negotiations 2001-2002 (at 4 July 2002)  
12 March 2001Bargaining for Secondary Teachers’ Collective Agreement initiated by PPTA.  
27 March 2001First process agreement signed.  
3 April 2001First meeting, PPTA claim tabled.  
10 April 2001Government Offer to PPTA tabled.  
30 April 2001Secondary Teachers’ Collective Employment Contract (STCEC) expires. PPTA formally seek agreement over collective coverage options after expiry of STCEC.  
8 May 2001Ministry propose short term Collective Agreement with a term of 1 May 2001 to 30 June 2001.  
18 May 2001Short term Collective Agreement agreed.  
PPTA formally initiate bargaining for a new Collective Agreement to replace the short term agreement.  
Parties further agree that the previous Process Agreement with amendments to personnel is to continue.  
21 May 2001PPTA advise Management Committee ratified short term Collective Agreement.  
30 June 2001Short term Collective Agreement reaches expiry date - section 53 of the Employment Relations Act operates to continue agreement to 30 June 2002.  
6-7 August 2001First days of mediation.  
24 August 2001Focus Group meeting with principals on contact hours issue.  
October 2001Industrial action begins – including rostering home.  
15 October 20011 day national strike.  
5 December 2001Second round of mediation begins.  
6 December 2001Settlement reached. (45 days negs)  
Early Feb 2002PPTA membership ratification meetings  
18 Feb 2002PPTA membership reject December settlement (56% of votes against ratification).  
18 Feb 2002PPTA advise national strike 1 March.  
1 March 2002Second day of nation-wide strike action.  
20 March 2002New Government offer tabled  
22 March 2002PPTA advise that the executive reject the offer and will not take it out for ratification.  
26 March 2002Ministry request mediator assistance.  
4 April 2002Parties re-enter mediation.  
12 April 2002PPTA seek membership endorsement of new claim.  
Mediation adjourned.  
Rostering home action continues.  
26 April 2002Ministry advise PPTA offer is ready and are unable to table because of strikes.  
29 April 2002 Mediation suspended due to strikes. Ministry advise PPTA that the strikes are impeding progress and urge PPTA to lift these strikes.  
14 May 2002 Mediation - PPTA table counterclaim.  
Government response  
15 May 2002Mediation  
16 May 2002(3am)Second settlement reached in mediation.  
17 May 2002Wildcat strike action over settlement begins.  
10 June 2002PPTA membership rejects May settlement (75% of votes against ratification).  
10-17 June 2002Informal talks to find a way forward.  
Ministry propose NCEA focus group to look at issues and find practical solutions.  
14 June 2002 PPTA conduct “straw poll” on new mandate  
June 2002Industrial action recommences extra-curricular ban and rostering home action proposed.  
Student “strikes” occur throughout country.  
17 June 2002PPTA announces suspension of rostering home action.  
Extra-curricular bans remain in place.  
18/19/20 June 2002PPTA stopworks to seek new mandate for bargaining  
21 June 2002Negotiations recommence  
PPTA does not achieve majority support for new claim – increase claim to backdate allowance of $3000 per year for 2002/2003  
PPTA table new claim – increased from May claim.  
22 June 2002 NZSTA conference – closed meeting with secondary school board chairs  
23 June 2002 Negotiations  
25 June 2002 NCEA forum with principals, teachers and students  
27 June 2002 Mediation –range of ideas discussed  
28 June 2002 Mediation  
Secondary principals, Area school principals, Area school teachers collective agreements settled (to be ratified).  
1 July 2002CA lapsed – all secondary teachers on individual agreements  
2 July 2002Ministry initiates bargaining to ensure continuation of process.  
Restate offer of short term CA.  
3 July 2002Mediation.  
4 July 2002Ministry table new offer with NCEA implementation units.  
Agree to reconvene Monday 8 July.