---
title: "Minister opens Taieri's new $1.4m technology suite"
date: 2005-08-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23912
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Taieri College’s new $1.4 million technology suite was opened today by Education Minister Trevor Mallard.

Taieri College was formed in January 2004 after the merger of Taieri High School and Mosgiel Intermediate. That merger and subsequent roll growth generated an extra $8.3 million in funding for school building improvements over five years.

“I am delighted that the additional property funding has enabled Taieri College to build a modern technology suite that will be used by students throughout the Taieri district,” Trevor Mallard said. “The new technology suite is an exciting example of good design and innovative construction methods and materials.

"The government is committed to providing strong public services such as schools that are modern, up-to-date, enjoyable learning environments.

“I have been very impressed with the progress the College’s board has made in providing this technology suite and other new facilities. I’d like to congratulate the board for their energy, commitment and drive in making these improvements a reality for the students.”

Since 2004 Taieri College has undertaken a number of major building projects, in addition to the three new technology rooms, including:

- an 11 classroom teaching block for Year 7 and 8 students
- an upgraded library, staffroom, principal’s office, classroom block and heating system
- relocating the agriculture/horticulture laboratory, propagation room and garden area
- provision of centralised special needs facilities and improved disability access
- new asphalted playing areas, ancillary sheds and car parks.

“It is especially pleasing that the College’s excellent new facilities will also benefit Year 7 and 8 students from neighbouring full primary schools, as those students will be able to use the suite to further their technology studies as well,” Trevor Mallard said.

“The new technology suite matches the strong emphasis in the Taieri area on innovation and technology, for example, at local companies such as Fisher and Paykel and the Invermay Agricultural Centre.

“That means there are also exciting opportunities for partnerships that will enable Taieri College students to be well prepared for future employment and enterprise,” Trevor Mallard said.