---
title: "Child, Youth and Family not warned about abuse"
date: 2005-08-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23914
ministers:
  - Ruth Dyson
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Child, Youth and Family Minister Ruth Dyson today released a report into the department’s handling of a case where children were placed in the care of an approved caregiver alleged to have subsequently sexually abused them.

Ms Dyson called for an investigation into the case after National MP Paul Hutchison said that Child, Youth and Family had ignored concerns raised about the caregiver.

“The abuse of any child is a tragedy. For this reason, the department has strict procedures for assessing caregivers. The investigation showed that these procedures were followed, including a police and medical check and two positive references,” Ruth Dyson said.

Ms Dyson said no concerns were raised before the children were placed with the caregivers.

“Following the placement of the children, a number of general concerns were raised, none of which alleged sexual abuse of the children. The department investigated all of these concerns. Two of the children were subsequently removed for reasons unrelated to concerns raised about the man. When the police provided information showing the third child was at risk, that child was immediately removed as well.”

Ruth Dyson said Dr Hutchison had first raised the issue of abuse three months after the third child had been removed.

“An earlier letter from Paul Hutchison did not raise warnings about the man. Rather it talked about issues regarding the parents’ accommodation and their desire to get their children back. At the end, it said the parents were concerned about three of the children living with the caregivers. No details were provided about the nature of this concern.”

Ms Dyson said the department took any allegation of child abuse extremely seriously, particularly when it related to an approved caregiver. For this reason, the chief executive had asked for a departmental audit of caregiver assessment and review processes and their application. This case will form part of the audit which is expected to be completed in early November.