---
title: "Government to combat vehicle exhaust noise"
date: 2005-08-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23911
ministers:
  - Harry Duynhoven
portfolios:
  - Transport Safety
---

The Minister for Transport Safety, Harry Duynhoven, today announced a new proposal to combat excessive noise from motor vehicles.

“A small number of vehicles are creating a great deal of nuisance. There is a need to address the impacts of excessive noise from vehicles and to identify acceptable levels of vehicle noise,” Harry Duynhoven said.

Primary among these measures will be the introduction of an objective noise test to supplement the subjective noise test currently being used by warrant and certificate of fitness testing agents.

“I have directed [Ministry of Transport](http://www.mot.govt.nz/) officials to introduce an objective noise test and specific decibel limit for vehicles, based on the international ISO 5130 measurement of exhaust sound level emitted by stationary road vehicles and the Australian National Stationary Exhaust Noise Test Procedure,” Harry Duynhoven said.

This proposal would enhance the recent increase of the infringement fee currently issued by NZ Police to enforce the driver behaviour aspect of the noisy vehicle rules (Road User Rule 2004). Under the recently passed Land Transport Amendment Act 2005 the infringement fee for this offence is raised to $250 and 10 demerit points are imposed. Previously, the infringement fee was $150 and no demerit points were imposed.

“I have requested [Land Transport New Zealand](http://www.landtransport.govt.nz/) review its audit regime of warrant and certificate of fitness and ‘at border’ testing agents to ensure the system is robust and accountable. This will include the auditing of noise compliance with current legislation. I have also asked Land Transport New Zealand to investigate options to ensure the exhaust manufacturing, supply and repair industry ensures their products are legally compliant,” Harry Duynhoven said.

To address the wider sources of land transport noise, transport officials in conjunction with other government officials, are in the process of investigating a [National Environmental Standard](http://www.mfe.govt.nz/laws/standards/) for land transport noise, as part of the government’s commitment to reducing the environmental and human health impacts of land transport.

“Excess noise pollution from vehicles disrupts people’s lives and is the source of great annoyance and frustration for many people. The government is committed to dealing with this environmental hazard to improve the well being of New Zealanders,” Harry Duynhoven said.

* * *

**Questions and Answers**

**1. What vehicle noise legislation is in place now?**

Currently, section 7.4 of the Land Transport (Road User) Rule 2004 provides for on-road enforcement of vehicle noise. Under this Rule, a Police officer can issues an instant $150 infringement offence notice if a person operates a vehicle that creates noise which, having regard to all the circumstances, is excessive. This includes noise from stereos and “boom boxes”. The Land Transport Amendment Act 2005 increased the infringement fee for this offence to $250 and imposes 10 demerit points.

In addition to roadside enforcement, all vehicles undergo a subjective noise test during warrant and certificate of fitness (WoF/CoF) checks. Clause 2.7(3) of the Land Transport Rule: Vehicle Equipment 2004 (previously, regulation 81 of the Traffic Regulations 1976) states that noise from an exhaust system must not be noticeably and significantly louder than it would have been when the motor vehicle was manufactured with its original exhaust system.

Under [section 115(1) of the Land Transport Act 1998](http://www.legislation.govt.nz/libraries/contents/om_isapi.dll?clientID=3730240853&hitsperheading=on&infobase=pal_statutes.nfo&jump=a1998-110%2Fs.115&softpage=DOC#JUMPDEST_a1998-110/s.115), a Police officer can also ‘green sticker’ a vehicle that is seen to breach the noise requirements of the Vehicle Equipment Rule 2004, directing that the vehicle is not to be driven on a road until it has passed a WOF test at an independent testing station.

**2. What is an objective noise test?**

An objective noise test uses scientific methods to measure noise levels. In this case, the proposed objective noise test would scientifically measure vehicle exhaust noise levels against a pre-determined standard.

**3. What happens if a vehicle fails the objective noise test?**

Currently, if a vehicle fails the subjective noise test the vehicle is required to be repaired to make it compliant. If a vehicle is fitted with a modified exhaust, which causes the vehicle to fail, the exhaust must then be replaced. The same would apply if a vehicle failed the proposed objective noise test – the vehicle would need to be repaired to ensure it is compliant.

**4. Will the current subjective noise test continue?**

The proposed objective noise test is anticipated to supplement the subjective noise test currently being used by warrant and certificate of fitness testing agents. It is foreseen that vehicles failing the current subjective noise test may be required to undergo an objective noise test.

**5. How will the objective noise test be monitored for consistency?**

Land Transport New Zealand is responsible for auditing and compliance of warrant and certificate of fitness providers and the testing of vehicles entering New Zealand, and has an ongoing programme to ensure that vehicle compliance rules are applied consistently across New Zealand. Any proposed objective noise testing standard would also meet these conditions.