---
title: "Airplay of Kiwi music more than doubled since 1999"
date: 2005-08-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23995
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

The Labour-led government's pledge to have New Zealand music account for 20 per cent of music played on commercial radio has been achieved well ahead of the December 2006 deadline, Broadcasting Minister Steve Maharey announced today.

The goal was adopted in a Code of Practice by the Radio Broadcasters Association in 2002. The latest quarterly figures for the year to June show that New Zealand content now accounts for 20.3 percent of all music played on commercial radio.

"This is a big achievement for Kiwi musicians and New Zealand broadcasters alike," Steve Maharey said. "When Labour was first elected in 1999, New Zealand music accounted for only 8.68 per cent of what was played on commercial radio.

"The amount of New Zealand music played on the radio has more than doubled under the Labour-led government. It's up 133 percent since 1999.

"When we first set the goal, sceptics – especially in the National Party – said we would drive broadcasters out of business. Reaching the goal ahead of target shows that the opposite was true.

"Once people realised that Kiwi music could be popular, broadcasters moved to quickly ramp up the local content on their airwaves. I congratulate the Radio Broadcasters Association and all of our commercial broadcasters for their success in delivering more New Zealand music to the public."

Steve Maharey said the government would continue its support for New Zealand musicians to get their music heard both here and abroad. Budget 2005 included a $5.4 million package to promote the export of New Zealand music.

"New Zealand music is moving from strength to strength. We can all celebrate this important milestone, but we need to keep up the momentum. The government will keep working with musicians to help them achieve their goals, both here and overseas."