---
title: "Maori unemployment rate drops again"
date: 2005-08-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23985
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

Minister of Mâori Affairs, Parekura Horomia is delighted to see a further fall in the Maori unemployment rate in the June 2005 quarter according to the Household Labour Force Survey (HLFS) released today.  
"The latest quarter's rate of 8.6% is equivalent to 17,000 Maori unemployed out of a Maori labour force of 197,000. So in other words, 180,000 or 91.37% of all Maori in the labour force are working. Doesn't quite equate with the "doom and gloom" picture opposition parties are doing their best to paint of Maori.  
The annual average unemployment rate for Maori over the year to June 2005 was 8.7%, equal with the rate over the year to March 2005, which was the lowest annual average rate since the HLFS began in 1986. It is lower from 9.5% over the year to June 2004, and much lower than the all-time peak of 26.0% over the year to June 1992. The latest year’s annual average rate of 8.7% is equivalent to an annual average 17,400 people unemployed out of an annual average labour force of 200,800.  
"At this year's Hui Taumata it was made clear that the path for Mâori from dependency to development is through education, employment and enterprise; that Mâori would continue to steer their own economic development; and that the primary responsibility for successful Mâori development now lies with Mâori. Maori are responding to that challenge, and the declining number of unemployed Maori demonstrates this commitment.  
"This government shares that commitment. We have a unity of purpose and we are all focused on the contribution that Mâori make to a strong and growing economy.