---
title: "Funding boost for dance and drama training in NZ"
date: 2005-08-03
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23883
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister and Minister of Arts, Culture and Heritage Helen Clark announced today a $1.8 million funding increase for Te Whaea: the National Dance and Drama Centre.

The additional spending over four years will support Toi Whakaari: New Zealand Drama School and the New Zealand School of Dance, both of which are based at Te Whaea in Wellington.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said both schools had sought a review of their baseline funding and had raised concerns over their future financial viability.

"This money, from the 2005 Budget Education contingency fund, will ensure the ongoing development of the two schools, which provide high quality education and training for New Zealand's creative arts sector," Trevor Mallard said.

Helen Clark, Trevor Mallard, and Wellington Central MP Marian Hobbs, watched student performances at Te Whaea today.

Helen Clark said the funding increase underscores the Labour-led government’s commitment to building and maintaining a vibrant arts and culture sector in New Zealand.

"Our government appreciates the distinctive, and highly intensive nature of the education and training provided by both schools. This is why we have decided to increase funding so they can continue to deliver the high quality training required by the creative arts industry.

"Both Toi Whakaari and the New Zealand School of Dance have a vital role to play in supporting the performing arts. The government wants to ensure the schools continue to offer opportunities for realising the potential of the incredible pool of talent we have in New Zealand," Helen Clark said.

The funding will be used for ongoing infrastructure development as well as to attract and retain staff required to maintain and build capability of both schools.