---
title: "Key must come clean on policy funding"
date: 2005-08-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23938
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Don Brash and Maurice Williamson have put John Key on the spot with their latest transport promises. "National's finance spokesman John Key must come clean with what the party would really spend," says Transport Minister Pete Hodgson. "National's credibility depends on it."

John Key has been sticking to the plans Don Brash laid out for spending money from the Crown Account on transport under National in a speech to the AA on 1 April. That is to spend $600 million from the Crown Account on transport over the next three years. A Labour-led government would spend $1.235 billion from the Crown Account on transport over the same period.

However, Don Brash and Maurice Williamson have between them committed to spending this money "extra, in addition to, on top of what's currently planned."

Keeping these new promises would not cost the $600 m National has budgeted. It would cost $1.835 billion in transport spending from the Crown Account over the next three years.

"John Key needs to move fast to clear this up. Don Brash is taking part in his first leader's debate later this week. Right now Key hasn't given Brash the money to keep the $1.835 billion promises he and Williamson made on Friday.

"Will National spend $600 million or $1.835 billion on transport from the Crown Account over the next three years? Commuters, communities, construction workers and businesses deserve to know the truth."