---
title: "Agricultural industries to benefit from research partnership"
date: 2005-08-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23952
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark and Education Minister Trevor Mallard have announced a multi-million dollar government investment in two new projects to develop teaching and research partnerships between tertiary institutions and business.

The two successful applications under the [Partnerships for Excellence](http://www.tec.govt.nz/funding/strategic/p4excellence/p4excellence.htm) scheme involve:

$8.95 million for a trust established by Massey and Lincoln Universities, to enhance research in the agricultural and biological sciences. The private sector partners include Meat and Wool New Zealand, Dairy Insight, Fonterra, the New Zealand Fruitgrowers Federation and the Agricultural and Marketing Research and Development Trust (AgMardt), taking the total investment in the trust to $22 million.

$5 million for Massey University to create a research-based partnership with the equine industry. The partners are Bomac Laboratories, Matamata Veterinary Services and others in the equine industry.“The government is pleased it can support such exciting projects which will improve the tertiary education sector’s ability to meet specific industry needs,” said Helen Clark.

"The projects will integrate research and learning with industry requirements – in particular developing leaders capable of taking New Zealand’s primary industries into a new phase of productivity and export-led growth.

“Enhancing New Zealand’s international competitiveness is vital if primary industry is to remain a foundation of our economy.”

Trevor Mallard said that although the equine industry has the potential to earn more per hectare for New Zealand overseas than the dairy industry, to date it has not benefited from the same level of investment in research.

“It is hoped the government’s investment will go someway to remedying the under-investment in the equine industry. The partnership is expected to result in some excellent outcomes for the industry as well as regional and national economies, “ Trevor Mallard said.

“It will provide the industry with more skilled graduates, ensure that the New Zealand’s equine biosecurity, health and welfare remains world-class, and enhance equine veterinary care and science.”

The government has pledged more than $40 million this financial year to Partnerships for Excellence.

Partnerships for Excellence were launched by the government in 2003, was established to enhance innovation, encourage greater private sector investment in tertiary education and foster relationships between tertiary institutions, business and industry.

It allows tertiary institutions to seek funding from government for large-scale investment projects that will develop teaching and research partnerships between tertiary institutions and business.

“Partnerships for Excellence has created a climate for joint private investment on a scale never seen before in the tertiary sector,” Trevor Mallard said.

“By doing so, it will increase the capability of the tertiary education sector to underpin New Zealand’s social, regional and economic development by producing graduates with skills more closely aligned with industry needs.”

To be eligible for the scheme, projects need to be new and unable to be funded through other means. Private sector investment has to match that of government, with government funding to be used for capital costs such as buildings and equipment or endowment funds.

The Tertiary Education Commission, which administers the scheme, assesses individual projects, with funding set aside as part of the government’s annual budget process.

Detailed information about Partnerships for Excellence, including the assessment criteria, can be found on the Tertiary Education Commission website at [www.tec.govt.nz](http://www.tec.govt.nz).