---
title: "Fujian province recognises bovine excellence"
date: 2005-08-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23965
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Trade Negotiations
---

Trade Negotiations Minister Jim Sutton today presented livestock genetics company Samen with a gift from the Fujian provincial government in recognition of the bulls exported there.

Mr Sutton presented an elaborate vase to Samen chief executive Cees van Baar in Wellington this morning.

A Holstein bull and a Jersey bull were selected in New Zealand earlier this year, and Mr Sutton presented their purebred certificates and photos to Fujian province Vice-Governor Liu at the inaugural Sino–New Zealand dairy seminar in Beijing attended by 185 Chinese Agriculture Ministry officials, Chinese Dairy Association representatives, Chinese businessmen, and New Zealand representatives in June.

The animals will go to China in November.

Mr Sutton said there was a strong dairy industry established in Fujian province.

“From the trade mission I led there earlier this year, I can see a lot of opportunity for New Zealand companies to sell equipment and expertise in the region.”

Mr Sutton said there was no way the Chinese dairy industry could supply all the demand for dairy products within China.

“The Chinese economy is growing significantly. As its people get wealthier, their tastes are changing. Dairy products are increasingly attractive. As well, many local and state governments are introducing school milk programmes in order to improve the nutrition of their young people, and there is a lot of opportunity for New Zealand to supply dairy products in the off-season there.”