---
title: "Health Information Strategy for New Zealand launched"
date: 2005-08-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23905
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

A new health information strategy aimed at improving the flow of information in the rapidly changing health sector is being launched today by Health Minister Annette King.

"New Zealand is recognised as being at the forefront of using information to support cost effective health and disability services, and I'm delighted to be launching the Health Information Strategy for New Zealand which will enhance this further."

"To improve the health outcomes for New Zealanders, we need to work smarter - to work smarter, then better information is our lifeblood."

The Health Information Strategy for New Zealand has been developed by a sector steering group led by Chai Chuah, Chief Executive of Hutt Valley Health.

"To make effective informed decisions about targeting health services, we need quality information, this strategy provides the roadmap to achieving this."

The strategy identifies twelve priority areas, called action zones. Five of these are about information systems that underpin the health sector, for example developing a data quality strategy for the National Health Index (NHI). The other action zones focus on cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic conditions, outpatients and primary care.

Nearly two million dollars has been allocated for the Ministry of Health to contribute to projects in these key areas. In addition an extra $700,000 has been allocated to the Ministerial Advisory Committee overseeing the implementation of the Health Information Strategy for New Zealand.

This governance role will be the task of the Health Information Strategy Action Committee, formerly known as the Health Information Standards Organisation (HISO). The ten members of that committee have all accepted their new role.  
The success of the strategy relies on the co-operation and collaboration of the entire health sector. It has three broad objectives, to increase participation through networking and sharing of health information across the sector, supporting collaboration across providers in the care of consumers, and improving targeting through improved decision-making.