---
title: "Breastfeeding guide supports women in workplace"
date: 2005-08-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23915
ministers:
  - Ruth Dyson
portfolios:
  - Labour
---

A new guide for employers on how to create breastfeeding-friendly workplaces will help mothers who want to combine caring and work responsibilities, Associate Labour Minister Ruth Dyson said today.

“After having a baby, many women face important decisions about when and if to return to paid work. Being able to continue to breastfeed or express milk in the workplace may be a critical factor in those decisions. If women are to have real choice, workplace practices and cultures must be supportive of breastfeeding.”

Ruth Dyson said employers might be surprised how uncomplicated it could be to create a breastfeeding-friendly workplace.

“It only takes four simple steps: communication, time, space and support.”

She said making it easier for mothers who were returning to work also made good business sense.

“Supporting breastfeeding in the workplace helps employers attract and retain valuable staff, address skills shortages and increase productivity. It reduces absenteeism and enhances a business’s reputation as a good place to work.”

Breastfeeding in the Workplace has been published by the Department of Labour to coincide with World Breastfeeding Week. It contains practical suggestions for both small and large employers, and came out of the government’s review of the implementation of paid parental leave in 2003.

“Early indicators are that the Labour-led government’s introduction of 13 weeks paid parental leave and the entitlement to extended unpaid leave have increased the number of women choosing to breastfeed in the early months of their baby’s life, with the expected improvement in infant health that this brings,” Ruth Dyson said. “Our aim is to give women real choice if they want to return to work, while ensuring that babies continue to enjoy the benefits of breastfeeding.”

Breastfeeding in the Workplace is available from the Department of Labour’s (freephone) Infoline (0800 20 90 20, or on the Department’s website at www.ers.dol.govt.nz. The guidelines are also being distributed by the Women’s Health Action Trust.