---
title: "Young entrepreneurs win praise from Ministers"
date: 2005-08-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23942
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The Ministers of Education and Health have congratulated a group of Year 12 students for a school project in which they designed a wearable tattoo to alert people when they need to apply sunscreen.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard and Health Minister Annette King congratulated Wellington East Girl's College Lion Foundation Young Enterprise Scheme participants Kristin Cheung, Amy Stringer, Tanunya Visessonchok, and Natchaya Teinpotphong at a ceremony in Parliament tonight.

The Young Enterprise Scheme is a learning experience for senior secondary students who form a company; become directors; and develop products and services, which they then market and sell.

"The government wants to build an education system that equips New Zealanders with 21st Century skills," said Trevor Mallard. "Through enterprise education students acquire knowledge and skills including a 'can do' attitude, and creative and innovative thinking.

"The group from Wellington East Girls who formed the Bugs Eye View company this year to develop their sun-smart tattoo idea have worked to a tight timeframe whilst developing their enterprise development skills. I congratulate them for their initiative and for getting the product to tonight's launch stage."

Health Minister Annette King says one of the main health issues facing New Zealanders is the incidence of cancer, particularly skin cancer.

"We are all looking for innovative ways that will help people learn to protect themselves against the sun," said Annette King. "These students have linked a good business idea with a pressing health issue and I commend them for their vision."