---
title: "100 days to kick-off"
date: 2011-06-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/100-days-kick
ministers:
  - Murray McCully
portfolios:
  - Rugby World Cup
---

With 100 days until the first whistle in the Rugby World Cup a series of key preparation milestones have been checked-off says the Rugby World Cup Minister, Murray McCully.

The tournament starts in Auckland on September 9th with the opening ceremony followed by the All Blacks versus Tonga match.

“It is pleasing to see the planning for the Rugby World Cup falling into place and one of the early signs of this will be a nation wide tour of the William Webb Ellis cup during July,” he said.

The road show involves a custom built truck with interactive displays and videos which will stop in 27 cities and towns from Kaitaia to Bluff. The mobile exhibition also sets out the New Zealand 2011 tournament details, the REAL festival highlights, and the history of the RWC.

“With 100 days remaining we are in good shape,” said Mr McCully.

“All major stadia redevelopments are completed. The major Eden Park redevelopment was finished last year. Otago Stadium will open in August.”

“Ticket sales are also healthy, with a further issue of tickets due to take place on July 4th”, he said.

“We are expecting 85,000 fans from just over 100 countries and 2000 media to arrive so we will be showcasing New Zealand internationally at every opportunity, through the REAL New Zealand Festival, the REAL Showcase, and the Business Club.”

“The Festival has over 600 events planned while the Showcase will present the best of our businesses from seventeen different sectors through 270 different events,” said Mr McCully.

“I am pleased the recruitment for the volunteer programme has gone well and over 5,000 volunteers will work in fan zones, meet guests at the airports, and work behind the scene at stadia,” he said.

“Much of the hard work is done and now New Zealanders can join in and soak up the festival spirit of the tournament,” said Mr McCully.