---
title: "World Day for Water"
date: 2000-03-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10002
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Everyone has a responsibility to protect New Zealand’s fabulous water resources, the Minister for the Environment, Marian Hobbs, said today.

To acknowledge World Day for Water (March 22) Ms Hobbs released a sheet of handy tips to help people realise what actions they can take to improve the quality of New Zealand’s beaches. She also took part in a training exercise on Wellington’s Oriental Bay, highlighting local government monitoring systems.

"New Zealand is well endowed with quality bathing beaches, which means we tend to take them for granted," Marian Hobbs said.

"Each individual can have an effect on the environment and on our waterways. It is up to them to decide whether that effect will be positive or negative."

Ms Hobbs praised the work of local and regional councils, which monitor the water that people swim in at beaches around New Zealand.

"The work councils do not only helps us know which beaches are safe for swimming, but also provides the information about where pollution is coming from – and without that information we can’t do anything about it," she said.

"Pollution can come from a number of places. Rain water washes directly into our waterways, via stormwater drains. But often it takes with it rubbish, animal droppings or other pollutants. In both urban and rural areas stormwater runoff can contain silt, nutrients and bacteria, oil and grease, heavy metals and toxic substances, and litter and household wastes.

"Anything you tip or spill directly down your local stormwater drain goes directly to our waterways. Even simple acts such as washing the family car on the driveway or the street, where harmful detergents can be washed down stormwater drains, can result in the pollution of our waterways. It is important for the future of our waterways that everyone understands this and makes sure they become part of the solution not part of the problem."