---
title: "Library Court Action Withdrawn"
date: 2000-03-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10003
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - National Library
---

An application for a Judicial Review of the National Library’s proposed restructuring has been withdrawn.

The parties to the action – the Friends of the Turnbull Library, and National Library Chief Executive Christopher Blake – have jointly agreed that the case will not proceed.

Marian Hobbs, the Minister Responsible for the National Library, has welcomed the withdrawal of the action.

"I am pleased with this outcome," she said. "I have requested Christopher Blake that the restructuring proposals which are still outstanding be reviewed by a Library working group. The Friends of the Turnbull Library have accepted this course of action.

"I will also initiate a review of the National Library Act in due course, to ascertain whether it still meets the requirements of a modern library and how it meets the needs of two libraries in one, the National and the Turnbull, each having different functions."

Ms Hobbs halted the restructuring of the National Library in December, in order to provide an opportunity to review the strategic plan implementation.

Since then, she has talked with interested parties including the Trustees of the National Library, LIANZA (the Library and Information Association of New Zealand Aotearoa), the National Library Society, the Friends of the Turnbull Library and users of the National Library.

The terms of reference for the review of the restructuring are to deliver on the goals of the Library’s strategic plan; to enhance the integrity and reputation of the Alexander Turnbull Library; and to maintain core capacity in librarianship and research skills.