---
title: "Phil Goff media conference on AUSFTA"
date: 2004-02-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/phil-goff-media-conference-ausfta
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

Phil Goff:I’m sure you have all seen the broad outline of the agreement that has been successfully negotiated between Australia and the United States. There have been various characterisations made of that agreement, and it is not my intention to try to characterise it here.  
Some of the advances that have been made will be staged in over rather a long time. There have been some areas where no progress was made, but those are areas not necessarily affecting New Zealand, such as sugar.  
New Zealand very much welcomes the fact that the two countries have been able to reach agreement, and congratulates them on the progress that they’ve made towards reducing barriers to trade. At this point the only information we have is the press statements that have been made by either side. We have yet to see the detailed final text, but naturally when it comes in, we will be looking at it very closely.  
It’s worth mentioning that while this is a major step in the negotiations, it is not yet the final step. This has to be approved in the United States by Congress, and it will be rather a tight timetable before the recess in the summer before the elections; and it also has to go before the Australian Senate. Australia is, of course, our largest market. We have two-way trade of something like $13 billion. The United States is our third largest market, with two-way trade of around $8 billion.  
In so far as a Free Trade Agreement between the two sides will encourage growth and strengthen the economies of both countries, that is obviously good for New Zealand because they are such important markets for us. Anything in particular that benefits the Australian market is going to have a positive spin-off for New Zealand. The diversion of Australian trade from other countries to the United States also potentially creates opportunities for us in those markets. Conversely, as a CER partner, there is, in the reduction of trade barriers between Australia and the United States, some risk of investment diversion and, perhaps, trade diversion.  
Therefore, New Zealand clearly is still keen on negotiating a Free Trade Agreement with the United States. We will continue to pursue negotiations with the US, which to date has neither ruled in or out a Free Trade Agreement with New Zealand. New Zealand has won very significant corporate support in the United States for such an agreement. Over 300 of the United States’ largest companies have written to President Bush in support of the New Zealand case. Equally, we have good congressional support. Fifty members of the House of Representatives, and 20 Senators have also written to the President in support of our case.  
It is fair to say that without an Australian-United States Free Trade Agreement there would have been very limited prospects of New Zealand hoping to negotiate such an arrangement with the United States. While average tariffs on New Zealand products going into the United States are quite low now — they average 2.8 percent across the board — the removal of this level of tariffs would obviously be advantageous to New Zealand, as would greater access to the American market.  
Having said that, while the FTA with the United States is an important goal for New Zealand, it ranks alongside the importance we attach to regional arrangements through APEC, and the main game, which we’ve always regarded as the successful conclusion of the WTO Round, with an emphasis on agriculture. There are things that we can achieve through the WTO, such as the removal of agricultural export incentives and domestic support, that simply cannot be achieved bilaterally, but, nevertheless, we continue in our endeavours to develop bilateral arrangements that reduce blockages to our goods and reduce tariffs, such as we are currently doing with Thailand and with China.  
In summary, I think the Free Trade Agreement that has been negotiated presents some solid benefits to both sides, though the negotiations were clearly very tough. It was a hard fought battle. As John Howard said, friendships don’t always amount to a lot in trade negotiations.  
The sector groups have exercised a lot of influence in the final income, and, naturally, countries, particularly in election year, are always going to be looking at protecting their domestic interests and their political support that has made the environment for these negotiations much tougher.  
Having said that, we would hope, down the track, that there is the opportunity for New Zealand to have a similar agreement with the United States. That would be of benefit, I think, to the growth in the economies in both countries, though New Zealand, obviously, is a smaller market than that of Australia. Are there any questions?  
Media:There seem to be some considerable constraints around this deal. Is this kind of deal worth having for New Zealand  
Goff: I think that both the United States and Australia feel that this is a landmark agreement, notwithstanding the constraints that you have mentioned. It is a step forward. It’s maybe not as large a step forward as some interests would have wanted, but it is a step towards trade liberalisation, and New Zealand would obviously welcome the opportunity to enter into similar negotiations for the future. That would occur some time after this agreement is finalised through the Congress.  
Media:Does it make it inevitable that one day we’ll have an agreement with the States ourselves?  
Goff:I don’t think it makes it inevitable. Nothing is inevitable in life except death and taxation, as somebody once commented. It remains a goal; one of a range of goals we have that would improve our economy by opening up trade opportunities bilaterally, regionally, and through the WTO. A good WTO Round, of course, would move forward quite substantially in the agricultural area. That would be, perhaps, of the single greatest benefit to New Zealand.  
Media:What impact is this going to have on CER?  
Goff:CER have gone from strength to strength over 20 years, and the most recent figures show that the growth in trade between the two countries is continuing unabated. Anything that strengthens the Australian economy is going to be beneficial to New Zealand, and the Australian–US Free Trade Agreement will have a positive effect on the Australian economy.  
Media:Aren’t businesses that are looking at setting up either in Australia or New Zealand now more likely to set up in Australia, given the access to the US?  
Goff:That would occur if you imagined that the only benefit was the Free Trade Agreement. New Zealand continues to have benefits in terms of cost structure, in terms of dollar value, and in terms of the quality of what we produce. So that will assist. But there is the potential for investment or trade diversion. We are conscious of that. The United States is conscious of that, and the United States has consistently said to us that in negotiating an agreement with Australia, there is no intent on their side to in any way damage the New Zealand economy. On that basis, of course, it would be logical to have a similar agreement with New Zealand, and that’s what we’ll continue to push for.  
Media:But isn’t it true that the US is basing that sort of statement on the fact that any studies they’ve seen haven’t been able to prove a detrimental effect on investments?  
Goff:I think the studies that have been done, in particular the Bergsten report that was done by the US–New Zealand Business Council, show that there are downsides if New Zealand is to be excluded from a Free Trade Agreement. Equally, there are benefits that New Zealand will gain from a strengthening of the economy of two of our three largest partners, which will overcome the downside. So it is a win-win situation, and that is obviously what New Zealand’s goal is.  
Media:Is New Zealand a net loser, though? If you take this balance that you’ve just talked about, putting the pros and cons of the agreement between Australia and the US, are we still the net loser in it?  
Goff:No, I don’t think that is inevitably the case at all. Of course, nobody knows at this point what the extent of potential diversion of investment or trade would be, and what the potential would be of the growth of the New Zealand economy in response to a stronger Australian and US economy. The two things balance out, but like all countries, New Zealand would like to have its cake and eat it too.  
Media:Do you think Australia is being rewarded for supporting the war in Iraq?  
Goff:Not according to the comment that John Howard made just a week ago. He actually elaborated on that. I think the end of his comment was: “... and I’ve never said that it’s the sort of thing where sentiment and political friendship will triumph over local and sectoral self-interest". I think John Howard’s assessment is absolutely correct.  
Media:Any deal at all, however, for Australia is a win. It is not the typical case for a free-trade deal in terms of recent deals settled by the United States. The fact that they’re getting a deal at all is surely a reflection of that.  
Goff:I think, in terms of the difficult negotiating environment, Australia is happy with the gains that it has been able to achieve.  
Media:Can I just ask you exactly where New Zealand’s bid is at? Obviously this is not a good time to be pursuing it, but where is it at and when will it be stepped up again?  
Goff:It’s always time to step up our efforts in regard to promoting our interests in trade, and we’ll continue to do that. The Minister of Trade Negotiations, whom I’m speaking on behalf of today, has on his itinerary a visit to Washington, along with the other discussions he has in the WTO context. Clearly once the agreement is finalised through Congress, we would also hope that Australia would be supportive of New Zealand’s bid for a similar agreement between New Zealand and the United States, on the basis that Australia also has a strong vested interest in the strength of New Zealand as a market for its goods. We’re one of its larger markets.  
Media:Where do trade agreements leave the APEC goals of 2010-20?  
Goff:New Zealand keeps faith with the pursuit of the APEC goals — the Bogor goals — and we encourage our colleagues in the APEC forum to do so. I’ve just come back from two conferences in Asia. While they were focused on things other than trade, I did discuss with a number of the ASEAN countries the prospect for closer economic relations between our various countries. I have to say that there was a very positive response from countries in Asia that are now probably three or four of the 10 top markets for New Zealand. Equally, we have had a very positive response in setting up a trade and economic framework with China, and those talks are proceeding well, as are the discussions with Thailand.  
Media:Australia’s Labour leader described it as a dud deal for their farmers, so why would we want to pursue a similar deal?  
Goff:It’s not for me to enter into the internal political arguments in Australia.  
MediaHow do you assess that from an agricultural perspective?  
Goff:I said at the beginning that I didn’t particularly want to characterise it. It’s not New Zealand’s role to do that, other than to look at how such an agreement might affect our interests, and I’ve spelt that out today.  
Media:Do I understand from your first answer that you are now prepared to drop the previous insistence New Zealand governments have taken that you would only negotiate a comprehensive agreement? Do I understand now that you would accept a similar agreement to the one the Australians have with the US?  
Goff:Our position has consistently been that any bilateral trade agreement that we negotiate is consistent with our WTO obligations and our goals in that area.  
Media:Doesn’t the lack of progress on the agricultural issues between Australia and US bode very badly for APEC and WTO?  
Goff:I’ve seen comments by the Trade Liberalisation Network to that effect, but I don’t think it’s for me to comment on that.  
Media:Why do you think the Americans were willing to negotiate with Australia ahead of us, and despite its failings or weaknesses, concluded this agreement relatively quickly?  
Goff:Relatively quickly — I suppose everything is relative. Probably no more quickly than Free Trade Agreements with other countries such as Chile and the efforts to achieve a Free Trade Agreement with the central American countries.  
I think an obvious attraction of Australia as a negotiating partner is the fact that two-way trade there is NZ$41 billion, compared to NZ$8 billion in the two-way trade between New Zealand and the United States. So size is obviously a factor.  
Clearly, Australia has also sought to work on the basis of its very close relationship with the United States, though John Howard’s comments last week would tend to suggest that he believes that that wasn’t the major factor in the outcome of the negotiations.

ENDS