---
title: "$1 million grant for waste reduction research"
date: 2010-08-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/1-million-grant-waste-reduction-research
ministers:
  - Nick Smith
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Another innovative New Zealand technology will move closer to production thanks to support provided by the Government through the Waste Minimisation Fund, Environment Minister Nick Smith announced in Rotorua today.

"Biosolids generated by sewage treatment are a big problem for New Zealand's landfills due to the large volume and hazardous nature of this waste," Dr Smith said.

"Innovative thermal oxidation technology developed by Scion Research Ltd is designed to break down this waste and greatly reduce the amount entering landfills as well as cut greenhouse gas emissions. I am pleased to announce that Scion will receive $1 million from the Waste Minimisation Fund to pilot a process that reduces this waste.

"Backing an innovative project such as this is exactly what the Waste Minimisation Fund was set up to do and is the largest grant from the fund for 2010."

As a result of this funding, Scion, a Crown Research Institute based in Rotorua, will work with the Rotorua District Council, to pilot the new technology. Scion has named this project ‘Waste 2 Gold' as the thermal oxidation process also generates useable by-products.

"In addition to providing cost savings and reducing the impact on the environment, this project could also see new opportunities created for energy generation out of methane, as well as biotechnology and fertiliser production," Dr Smith said. "If the pilot is successful, this process could be expanded into other regions and other types of organic waste could be included in the future.

"This project is a clear example of how improving the environment and boosting economic growth can, and must go, hand in hand."