---
title: "VISITORS TO GET UNIQUE MAORI VIEW OF TOURISM IN NZ"
date: 2004-05-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/visitors-get-unique-maori-view-tourism-nz
ministers:
  - Dover Samuels
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

Associate Tourism Minister, Dover Samuels today congratulated Maori tourism operators who contributed to the Rough Guide to Maori New Zealand which was released internationally today.“This publication is a first for our country,” he said. “It gives overseas travellers a rare and unique insight into indigenous culture here. It gives a strong Maori face to tourism in this country, and it will be welcomed by international travellers wanting to experience our culture.”Rough Guide brand books are one the largest selling travel guide publications in the world. With more than 150 travel titles to destinations spanning the entire globe they are designed for independent-minded travellers and have been rated by well known armchair travel authors like Bill Bryson as ‘consistently readable, informed and, most crucially reliable.’As well as providing regional accounts of traditional tribal areas, Rough Guide to Maori New Zealand includes historical attractions, archaeological sites and the country's best museums and art galleries. Listings of tour operators, craft outlets, annual events, and cultural groups all offering a Maori perspective on New Zealand travel are also detailed, coupled with a selection of essays on indigenous culture, customs and language.Mr. Samuels said Rough Guide to Maori New Zealand was a perfect example of a cultural tourism product generated by the tourism sector working together to differentiate New Zealand in the global marketplace.The content of the book was collated by the Maori Tourism Network and Tourism New Zealand. It was written by Rough Guides. Other contributors include the NZ Historic Places Trust, Air New Zealand and Tailor Made Travel in the United Kingdom. Launched in New Zealand today by the Minister of Tourism, the Rough Guide to Maori New Zealand was simultaneously released at a special event in London.