---
title: "RMA  tune-up"
date: 2004-05-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/rma-tune
ministers:
  - David Benson-Pope
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

The programme of improvements planned for the [Resource Management Act](http://www.legislation.govt.nz/libraries/contents/om_isapi.dll?clientID=2471039047&infobase=pal_statutes.nfo&record=%7BF82ABA07%7D&hitsperheading=on&softpage=DOC) (RMA) will be more like taking the car in for a tune-up than for a trade-in, says the minister in charge.

Associate Environment minister David Benson-Pope today outlined detail of the scope of the review programme, making it clear that protecting the environment would remain the cornerstone principle of the Act.

“The Government is focusing on finding practical solutions to key problem areas identified after talking with business, local government, environmental organisations and the broader community over the past year-and-a-half," says Mr Benson-Pope.

"I don't believe we need to revisit the ideas that underpin the RMA because they are fundamentally sound.

“But we are seeking greater certainty and efficiency in the way the RMA operates, while not sacrificing public involvement and protection for our environment. Most people recognise the Act is actually in pretty good shape. But we know that a decent tune-up is in order."

"We need to get the balance right so that New Zealanders get the environmental protection they expect and deserve, and also get certainty about process. There is a lot we can do to improve the quality of decision making, and further reduce delays and uncertainty about costs."

The review will focus on five areas where there is room for improvement:  
a)Balancing local and national interests  
b)Local resource management planning  
c)Resource consent processing  
d)Natural resource allocation  
e)Capacity and practice in local government.

A ministerial reference group will be established to help ensure options are both "workable" and "desirable".

“We will be seeking public input on the potential solutions we identify working through the process over the next few months,” says Mr Benson-Pope.