---
title: "Tararua signs the 26th regional partnership plan -All New Zealand regions have plans underway"
date: 2002-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14251
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Consumer Affairs
---

All of New Zealand is now covered by the regional jobs machine, with the 26th regional partnership agreement now signed Jim Anderton announced today.

Industry and Regional Development Minister Jim Anderton confirmed today that Tararua will receive $70,000 which will be used to research regional development issues and to consult with the people in the region on economic priorities.

“The Tararua District Council has been working on their regional development programme for some time and this is the next step for them in developing their local economy.

“This is excellent news for Tararua and also for New Zealand. It has taken just eighteen months and now all regions of New Zealand are committed to regional development plans in partnership with the Government.

“Forming partnerships with all regions was a key election commitment and I am proud we have honoured this promise,” said Jim Anderton.

Twenty-five regions have already received a total funding of around $4.3m for the first two stages of the Programme.

There have been three major regional initiatives funded, each receiving $2 million each. These are the Waikato Innovation Centre, the Rotorua-based Forestry Centre of Excellence and the Wine Centre of Excellence in Blenheim.

Industry New Zealand contributes funds for regions to develop strategies, and to build capacity to implement them (up to $100,000 for each stage). Further funding of up to $2 million, is available to contribute to major regional initiatives that come out of the strategies developed in the first two stages.