---
title: "Growth and Innovation Advisory Board members"
date: 2002-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14094
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark today announced the membership of the Growth and Innovation Advisory Board.

Helen Clark said the board would play a key role in progressing the government’s growth and innovation policy framework, which was set out in the Growing an Innovative New Zealand document issued in February.

The members of the board are: Rick Christie, who will chair the board, chief executive of Rangatira Investments and a member of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board; Peter Biggs, managing director of advertising company Clemenger BBDO and chair of Creative NZ; Brian Easton, an independent economist and writer/consultant; Dr Graeme Fogelberg, vice-chancellor of Otago University; Theresa Gattung, chief executive of Telecom; Paul Goulter, secretary of the Council of Trade Unions; Dr John Hood, vice-chancellor of the University of Auckland and chairman of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board; Neville Jordan, chief executive of Protemix; Emily Loughnan, a director of internet and media technologies company Click Suite Ltd and a member of the Creative Capital cluster; Craig Soper, a co-founder of Compudigm, a business intelligence and data visualisation solutions provider; Stephen Tindall, founder of The Warehouse and a member of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board; and Dr Jim Watson, chief executive of Genesis Research & Development Corp Ltd.

Helen Clark said the Growth and Innovation Framework confirmed the government’s commitment to a role in the economy which is strategic, proactive and focused.

“I am pleased we have assembled such a high-calibre board to be part of the process of implementing the framework, which is about lifting New Zealand’s economic performance.

“I appreciate that despite how busy they already are, the board members are willing to make this commitment to advancing New Zealand’s well-being.

“The board will provide senior economic ministers and me with independent perspectives on how the government can advance its innovation and growth programme.

“It will be a vital element of the partnerships that the government is building with the private sector and wider community. It is through such partnerships that New Zealand can reap world-class returns from our innovations and our entrepreneurial activities.

“The board will also act as a sounding board for groups charged with the implementation of the framework.

“I expect the board will complement the work of government agencies in identifying ways in which we can improve the implementation of the Growth and Innovation Framework. I anticipate it will engage with other key players who are committed to continuing New Zealand’s transformation to a more innovative, knowledge-based economy.

“In summary, the setting up of the board is another important step towards ensuring that we exploit our growth potential,” Helen Clark said.

The board will be established as a non-statutory ministerial committee, supported by a secretariat hosted by the Ministry of Research, Science and Technology.

While it will be reporting to the Prime Minister, the Minister of Research, Science and Technology, Pete Hodgson, will have responsibility for its affairs.

Members of the Growth and Innovation Advisory Board

Rick Christie  
Mr Christie has an extensive background in management. He spent 21 years in the oil industry in New Zealand and overseas. He also spent nine years in the export sector, prior to joining the investment company Rangatira Ltd as chief executive. He is a member of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board. Mr Christie has an MSc (Hons) in Chemistry from Victoria University. He will chair the Growth and Innovation Advisory Board

Peter Biggs  
Mr Biggs’ career is in advertising and public relations. He is managing director of Clemenger BBDO. As chair of Creative NZ, he has spoken widely on the role of the arts and culture in New Zealand society and liaised closely with politicians, including the Prime Minister, over arts issues. He is an advocate for growing New Zealand’s economy by harnessing the creativity of New Zealanders. He is a member of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board. Mr Biggs holds an honours degree in English Literature and Classical Studies from Victoria University.

Brian Easton  
Brian Easton works as a researcher, writer, consultant and tertiary teacher. Involvement has been across academia, government, industry, unions, Maori and education. He has published extensively on the New Zealand economy and public policy. He has been the editor of New Zealand Monthly Review and Quarterly Predictions. He is currently economics columnist for the New Zealand Listener. He has been a member of various government statistics, economics and policy committees. He was a director of the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research between 1981 and 1986. Mr Easton currently has regular teaching engagements with Wellington Medical School (Diploma of Public Health) and the University of Auckland (Public Policy Economic Reform and Social Change in New Zealand). Mr Easton is a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and a chartered statistician.

Graeme Fogelberg  
Dr Fogelberg has a strong academic background in business administration and accountancy. As Vice-Chancellor of Otago University he is directly responsible to the University Council for effective management of the University.

During his career, Dr Fogelberg has taught in a variety of countries in executive development work; these include the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Hong Kong and Saudi Arabia. He has held professorships at Victoria University (1969–1992), the University of Western Ontario (1975–76, 1982–83) and Pennsylvania State University (1992–1993).

Dr Fogelberg has a Masters Degree in Accountancy and is a fellow of the New Zealand Society of Accountants and the New Zealand Institute of Directors. He is Chairman of the Association of Commonwealth Universities and Deputy Chairman of the New Zealand Vice-Chancellors’ Committee.  
Dr Fogelberg was Co-Chair of the Innovate Conference, 2002 and is a member of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board.

Theresa Gattung  
Ms Gattung’s career experience has been primarily in "new economy" companies – telecommunications, media, information technology – and in banking and finance. She has been Chief Executive Officer of Telecom since 1999.

As Group General Manger, Services for Telecom she had one of the single biggest line management positions in New Zealand business, accountable for revenues of NZ$3 billion and responsible for over 3,500 staff. She held this position from April 1996 until her appointment as Chief Executive.  
As Chair of the Wellington Kiwi Can Trust, Ms Gattung supports efforts to develop self-esteem and life skills in primary and secondary school aged children.

Ms Gattung has a Bachelor of Management Studies with Honours from the University of Waikato, majoring in Economics and Marketing. She also has a law degree from Victoria University of Wellington.

Paul Goulter  
Mr Goulter has a focus on how the development of workforce skills and workplace practices can maximise opportunities for economic growth through innovation. He is Secretary of the Council of Trade Unions.

Mr Goulter’s work experience includes working with unions, business and government in enterprise and industry development and change. Mr Goulter has a knowledge of the international finance sector, as well as links with labour unions in NZ and overseas. He is a member of the E-Commerce Action Team and the Employment Related Education Advisory Committee.

Mr Goulter holds degrees in psychology, industrial psychology and law from Otago, Canterbury and Victoria Universities, respectively.

John Hood  
Dr Hood is Vice Chancellor of the University of Auckland. He is also Chair of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board and a Director of Fonterra Cooperative Group and ASB Bank Ltd. Dr Hood has extensive international business experience after 18 years managing groups within Fletcher Challenge Ltd.

Dr Hood has the degrees of Doctor of Philosophy and Bachelor of Engineering with First Class Honours from the University of Auckland. He also has a Master of Philosophy in Management Studies from Oxford.

Neville Jordan  
Mr Jordan is Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Protemix. He is also on the Boards of the Foundation for Research, Science & Technology and Technology NZ.

In 1975 Mr Jordan founded MAS Technology Limited, a telecommunications company. MAS Technology was listed on the Nasdaq National Market and then was successfully merged with the US company, Digital Microwave Corporation. Mr Jordan is now involved as a venture capital investor. He has held previous management positions in the civil aviation industry and for IBM.  
Mr Jordan is a Distinguished Fellow of the Institute of Professional Engineers NZ and has been awarded the UK IEE Kirby medal for "outstanding eminence and distinction in advanced technology". He received the Governor General of New Zealand's Supreme Award for Exporting in 1996 and was honoured by the Queen in 1999 as a Companion of New Zealand Order of Merit.  
Mr Jordan holds a Bachelor degree in electronics engineering from Canterbury University.

Emily Loughnan  
Emily is a Director of Click Suite Ltd (1993), a company developing interactive television and internet technologies as delivery platforms for media to global audiences. Ms Loughnan’s has 15 years experience in television and with NZ on Air. Her experience in business development, marketing, external communications and strategic direction has propelled her company Click Suite to successful recognition nationally and internationally.

Ms Loughnan is also involved in the development of the broader industry, promoting the use of new technology through various organisations. She is Co-Chair of Creative Capital and a Board member of the Wellington Regional Economic Development Association.

Ms Loughnan has represented Wellington City at “Technology Expo” in Melbourne 1998 and attended the Excellerated Business School for Entrepreneurs in Hawaii 1994.

Craig Soper  
Mr Soper is currently managing independent entrepreneurial interests and supporting Maori entrepreneurship.

Mr Soper co-founded a software development company, Compudigm International, that has grown to a million dollar business with global offices in just 4 years. This was achieved through research and development and commercialisation of intellectual property. He is a now Non-Executive Director of Compudigm International.

Mr Soper has worked in government as Geographic Information Systems Developer for the Ministry of Maori Development, Te Puni Kokiri.

Mr Soper has a BCom, majoring in economics and management and a BA in computer science from Otago University. He is a Member of the Technology New Zealand Advisory Committee and a Director of the Maori Television Board.

Stephen Tindall  
Mr Tindall founded The Warehouse in 1982 and grew the company into a billion dollar business in both NZ and Australia before stepping down as Managing Director in 2001. Mr Tindall has since focused on the Tindall Foundation and environmental and sustainability type projects. The Foundation invests in identifying and funding a number of diverse initiatives in business, education and sport designed to stimulate innovation and excellence in New Zealand society. The Tindall Foundation has been involved in business incubation, and providing venture capital to young enterprises.

Mr Tindall has Honorary Doctorates from Auckland University of Technology and Massey University. He is an Officer of the New Zealand Order of Merit, awarded in 1997. He is a Member of the Knowledge Wave Trust Advisory Board and Chairman of the New Zealand Business Council for Sustainable Development.

Jim Watson  
Jim Watson is Chief Executive of Genesis Research & Development Corp Ltd, founded in 1994. Dr Watson has lead Genesis to build a strong genomics platform to capture intellectual property and uses a partnership strategy to develop commercial products in the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. Dr Watson has a significant scientific research career.  
Genesis is listed on the New Zealand Stock Exchange (NZSE: GEN) and the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX: GEN).

Dr Watson was the Head of Department, Molecular Medicine at the University of Auckland from 1983-94. Dr Watson is a Fellow of the Royal Society of NZ, and a trustee of the Malaghan Institute for Medical Research, a member of the Scientific Advisory Committee of the NZ Cancer Society and a Board member of the Foundation for Research, Science & Technology.