---
title: "Questions and Answers - Government and PPTA settlement on collective agreement for secondary teachers"
date: 2002-05-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14128
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

May 2002

When did the PPTA and government settle?  
Settlement was reached in mediation on Thursday 16 May 2002.

When did the negotiation process begin?  
April 2001.

What will happen next?  
The PPTA executive will meet to prepare for the ratification meetings. Regional meetings will be held to inform members about the details of the settlement. Each PPTA branch will meet by 6 June to vote on the package.

What does the settlement offer teachers?  
The settlement, agreed to by the PPTA executive and government negotiators, addresses key issues of workload, recruitment and retention that PPTA raised during negotiations.

Key elements of the settlement are:

·A salary increase of 2% effective July 2001, 1.5% effective July 2002 and 2% effective July 2003.

·The establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Secondary Teachers’ remuneration. The taskforce will examine secondary teacher supply, demand, qualifications, workload and other issues and report by July 2003.

·An additional allowance for the implementation of levels 1,2 and 3 of the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA). The allowance is $1,000 per annum from July 2002 increasing to $1,500 for the duration of the 2004 school year.

·An entitlement of 3 non-contact hours per week from 2002, increasing to 4 non-contact hours per week from 2005.

·A statement of intent from the Minister of Education to full implementation by the start of the 2006 school year of the staffing improvements based on the recommendations of the Staffing Review Group.

·An additional guaranteed two-and-a-half hours per week release time for second year beginning teachers.

·A High Priority Teacher Supply Allowance of $2,500 per annum, payable to approximately 460 secondary teachers in schools identified as experiencing the greatest staffing difficulties

When does the settlement expire?  
The settlement will expire 30 April 2004 and there will be a bargaining round at that time. This will be informed by the work of the Ministerial Taskforce. The NCEA allowance will also continue for that year.

How much will the settlement cost the government?  
The settlement package is worth around $150 million.

What will the average salary be if this settlement is agreed to?  
Average salaries are determined by the pay roll data – not the pay scale. They are real and actual figures based on what the teachers are paid, including their management units. The current average salary is $52,000 compared to $47,700 in March 1999 – an increase of 8 per cent. That does not include secondary school principals who are not part of the collective agreement.

The settlement provides for an average 7 per cent increase between now and April 2004 when the agreement expires.

Are teachers ready for NCEA?  
NZQA has been managing the implementation of NCEA closely and as part of integrating NCEA has visited schools to see if any extra support is needed.

92% of secondary school departments report they can easily adapt their current systems to meet the needs of the National Certificate of Education. This means that the vast majority of schools will actually be able to implement NCEA with no increase in staffing or resourcing.

After visiting schools NZQA found that only 4% of the schools are likely to require extra support.

Does the NCEA allowance address workload concerns?  
The NCEA allowance compensates for the new work teachers will have to do to implement NCEA.

The NCEA will be fully implemented by 2004 and will then become part of secondary teachers’ normal ongoing work. The allowance will cover the implementation period only.

How many teachers will receive the allowance?  
About 80 per cent of teachers will receive the allowance.

What about teachers who do not receive the allowance?  
Teachers who do not receive allowance will benefit from other parts of the settlement in particular salaries will continue to improve through percentage increases in 2002 and 2003.

Are strikes continuing?  
Some individual schools have decided to hold wildcat strikes.

The PPTA is advising members to express their views on the settlement through the ratification meetings and voting process.

How does the settlement address recruitment and retention issues?  
The government has stated its intention to implement staffing improvements by the beginning of 2006.

This year an additional 142 secondary teachers were in schools as the first step of the government plan to add 1850 new teacher positions over the next five years. This is in addition to the extra teachers required because of roll growth.

The Government has also announced that, dependent on ratification of the collective agreement, there will be 2 steps of staffing improvements introduced in 2003, i.e., a further 375 teaching positions.

What will the Ministerial Taskforce do?  
The Ministry of Education will co ordinate a taskforce to examine and report on secondary teachers’ remuneration. This taskforce will examine the relationship between secondary teacher workload, supply, demand, curriculum delivery, qualifications and other related issues.

The Ministerial Taskforce will report on its findings to the Minister of Education by 31 July 2003.