---
title: "Industry NZ helps engineers design revolutionary kitset milking machine"
date: 2002-05-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14249
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Life looks set to get easier for dairy farmers, thanks to a Northland engineering firm backed by Industry New Zealand.

Keri Keri-based Reef-Rite Reefing Co has designed an innovative rotary milking platform that is easier to install, maintain and clean than existing models. Clever design means the Rota-Rite unit uses about a third less power than competing products and comes in an easy-to-install kitset form.

Rota-Rite unit was developed with the help of a $75,000 grant from Industry New Zealand’s Business Growth Service. The grant will be matched dollar-for-dollar by Reef-Rite.

Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton announced the award today. “I am pleased that New Zealand businesses aren’t afraid to be innovative.

“This company is an excellent example of the kind of innovation we need to foster if New Zealand is going to grow its global economy.”

The milking platform’s inventors are Reef-Rite owners Bob Graham and his nephew Kevin Graham. Bob, an engineer, already has a string of successful inventions under his belt, including innovative Bi-Loc pulleys and rigging screws. Kevin’s background is in engineering and farming.

Bob says Rota-Rite uses a simple design change to solve the common problem of rotary milking units breaking down.

“Traditional rotary milking platforms are supported by numerous rollers around the outside edge that run on a steel ring, but it’s well nigh impossible to fabricate this steel ring perfectly flat on site,” he says.

“The load ends up being unbalanced, so the bearings jam and wear out quickly. The unit also uses extra power because it’s running up hill some of the time.”

Bob’s elegant solution was to dispense with the outer rollers and use a single, heavy-duty bearing at the centre of the unit. Designing the Rota-Rite as a kitset that can easily be bolted together on the farm also avoids the need to organise onsite welding.

Under Secretary for Economic Development Dover Samuels is pleased by Rota-Rite’s market potential.

“This unit has already caught the attention of farmers in New Zealand and Australia, and substantial export markets also exist in Chile, Brazil, North America and Europe.”

A Northland dairy farmer has just bought the first Rota-Rite unit.

Media Enquiries: Jenny Alexander \[press secretary] 04 471 9172  
email: Jenny.Alexander@parliament.govt.nz  
http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/anderton/index.html

Background Information

Reef-Rite Reefing Co Ltd was established in 1994 and is owned by Bob and Kevin Graham. The company’s mentor is Tone Coyte, formerly chief executive of Carter Holt Harvey’s Forests, Wood Products and Chile divisions.

Its main product is the Reef-Rite boom furling system, an easy-to-use unit designed for medium-sized yachts.

Reef-Rite will use Keri Keri and Whangarei companies to build the Rota-Rite. About 200 milking machines are sold in New Zealand each year. The Australian market is about three times the size.

Industry New Zealand was set up by the Government as the country’s economic development agency in October 2000. Its Business Growth Service and Fund help businesses get access to advice, expertise and information.

For more information contact:

Mike BookerBob Graham  
Phone (04) 4956324Phone: (09) 4078794  
E-mail: mike.booker@industry.govt.nzE-mail: reef.rite@xtra.co.nz