---
title: "Wildcat strikes can’t change the settlement"
date: 2002-05-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14021
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said today that wildcat strikes by secondary school teachers would not change the settlement package agreed last week between the government and the Post Primary Teachers Association.

“Every PPTA member has a right to vote for members of their executive, who then appoint people to negotiate with government their collective agreement. The PPTA is in the middle of a democratic process with their members who will make the decision on whether or not to accept the settlement package. It is not a process that I can or will intervene in,” Trevor Mallard said.

“Today I visited Onslow College – one of the schools that has taken wildcat strike action this week. Regardless of what some media reports are saying, I am not angry and I have not attacked those teachers for their action.

“I am still hopeful that the agreement will be ratified. It addresses a lot of the issues that we have been told are the key concerns of teachers, including extra staff and non-contact time to reduce workload.

“It also includes Ministerial Taskforce to look at remuneration issues. We will be taking a similar approach to the one we took in the 2000 review into school staffing. We looked at the issues, found a solution and as a result, are implementing a plan to increase staffing by 1850 over the next few years.

“I think it is important that teachers take the time to look at the agreement seriously and consider it in the light of this. Overall, taken as a package it is a good offer and I can’t see how Cabinet would approve one that costs more.

“In the meantime, however, I think it is important that I take a low key approach over the next few weeks while teachers take part in their democratic process.

“A number of other political parties are jumping on the bandwagon and making promises that they would be unlikely to keep. I can only assume that their rhetoric is based on the realisation that they will not be a member of the executive within the foreseeable future,” Trevor Mallard said.