---
title: "Congratulations to all involved in NZ Music Month"
date: 2002-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14185
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

New Zealand Music Month 2002 has been a roaring success for both makers and fans of homegrown music, Acting Arts, Culture and Heritage Minister Judith Tizard said today.

“I’m delighted with the attention that all genres of New Zealand music have received over the month and I hope that momentum continues throughout the year,” said Judith Tizard.

“I would like to officially congratulate the New Zealand Music Industry Commission for coordinating the month, which has included many gigs, live-to-airs, the Tui Awards, the Commission’s own seminars on industry issues, and more.

“I would also like to congratulate New Zealand On Air, Radio Broadcasters Association, television broadcasters including TV2, TV3 and Juice TV, the b.net, Radio New Zealand, Creative New Zealand, Australasian Performers’ Rights Association, Recording Industry Association of New Zealand, SOUNZ, record labels, retail outlets and all other organisations and individuals who have been involved in the month.

“The b.net stations and National Radio committed to their annual 100% New Zealand music weeks, and the commercial radio stations also put a huge effort into playing New Zealand music. As Broadcasting Minister Marian Hobbs remarked yesterday, figures for one week of May revealed an average New Zealand content of 20 per cent across all commercial stations sampled. M2 also achieved an above-target 37.5 per cent New Zealand music content during the month. That’s a huge boost for New Zealand music.

“New Zealand Music Month also saw three New Zealand singles in the top five on the singles charts at the same time. Two of those singles, by Nesian Mystik and goodshirt, are still in the top five.

“It has been fantastic to know that while we at home have been enjoying a month of heightened activity in the music industry, New Zealand musicians such as The Datsuns, D4 and Hayley Westenra have also been enjoying increasing attention overseas.

“That attention continues. This weekend on the other side of the world, New Zealand musicians and singers including Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, Che Fu and the Krates, Fur Patrol, The D4 and Wai are performing in Queen Elizabeth II’s Jubilee celebrations in London.

“And plans are underway for a big New Zealand electronica night in London in early July. A similar gig organised by Pitch Black last year sold out with a queue around the block.

“The government will continue to support the creation, promotion and exporting of New Zealand music through strategic partnerships between the music industry and government agencies such as Music Industry Commission, New Zealand On Air, Te Mangai Paho, Creative New Zealand, Industry New Zealand, Trade New Zealand, Work and Income New Zealand and the Ministry of Education.

“New Zealand music is world-class and the music industry is a significant growth industry. It makes good economic sense to support it.

“Congratulations to everyone involved. I would especially like to thank all New Zealand musicians for their songs. New Zealand’s bands and songwriters provide us with an important cultural touchstone, music that speaks to us of our own context and experiences. Along with all our artists, they play an essential role in highlighting what makes us uniquely New Zealand.

“They make great music and I thank them for it.”

More information on New Zealand Music Month and New Zealand music can be found on the NZ Music Industry Commission website: http://www.nzmusic.org.nz