---
title: "ICT budget boost good news for schools"
date: 2002-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14034
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said the major budget initiative to boost high speed internet access to rural and provincial areas would have a major impact on schools’ ICT capability.

“This will make a huge difference to schools throughout the country. We’ll be spending tens of millions of dollars over the next two years to improve internet access across the country.

“Schools are expected to be major winners and that’s why part of the funding to pay for this is coming from the education budget. I’m constantly amazed at the work schools are doing using ICT. But I also know that slow connections can restrict schools in rural and some provincial areas from fully utilising the benefits that ICT offers. With this initiative, those schools will be able to share the benefits of internet access for communication, curriculum resources and professional development.”

Trevor Mallard said the move complemented another budget initiative for an extra $9 million over four years to extend the very successful Information and Communications Technology cluster programme.

“There will be 20 new contracts for ICT clusters from 2003 and that will allow teachers from up to 200 more schools to explore new ways of teaching and learning using ICT.

“ICT clusters are proving to be an effective programme for schools and there are great learning opportunities for students in schools that are using ICT effectively. They provide long-term sustained support for teachers and schools to enhance the use of ICT in professional practice. “

Other budget initiatives to help schools meet their ICT needs include:

·$25 million over four years to support laptops for secondary teachers. All permanent, full-time secondary teachers, or their schools, will have the opportunity to lease a laptop over a three-year period. Government funding will meet up to two thirds of the total cost of leasing the laptops.

·$7 million over four years to be a collaborative partner in the Australian $68 million Learning Federation Project. Together we will develop high quality digital education content available to all schools. We will get a much better product than we would ever be able to provide alone and our participation will ensure suitability for the New Zealand school curriculum.

·An additional $700,000 a year to Te Kete Ipurangi – the online resource centre to be used to help support work with the National Library and overseas education portals to increase the range of resources available.

“Initiatives like this are proving vital in helping schools make smoother transitions into the digital community,” Trevor Mallard said.