---
title: "Appointments to New Zealand Film Commission"
date: 2002-05-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14162
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

Acting Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Judith Tizard today announced the appointment of Barrie Everard to the Chair of the Board of the New Zealand Film Commission for a term of office expiring on 30 June 2004.

Barrie Everard replaces retiring Chair Alan Sorrell, who has been a member of the Commission since 1993 and Chair since 1996.

"I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the outstanding contribution of outgoing Chair Alan Sorrell,” said Judith Tizard. “He has brought unfailing leadership, commitment, time and energy to the Commission and I thank him for his guidance and dedication to the work of the New Zealand Film Commission.”

Barrie Everard has been a member of the New Zealand Film Commission board since 1998. His company is currently the joint owner and operator of the Berkeley Cinema Group.

“I am delighted we are able to retain Barrie’s expertise and knowledge on the Commission. He brings a wide experience in a range of areas in the film industry, including film production and distribution,” said Judith Tizard.

Dr Hirini Melbourne, who has been on the Commission since 1998, is also retiring from the board.

“Hirini has made an enormous contribution to the work of the Commission. His significant cultural knowledge and expertise has been of great benefit and he leaves the cultural sector richer and deeper through his work.”

Judith Tizard also announced the appointment of Tainui Stephens and William Somerville as new members of the Commission for terms of office of three years each.

Tainui Stephens (Te Rarawa) is a television, radio and film producer and director, based in Ngäruawähia. Some of Mr Stephens’ recent projects include directing the television documentary series The New Zealand Wars, and work on the recording of Ihi FrENZy by the Royal New Zealand Ballet and Te Mätärae i Orehu.

William Somerville is a partner in the accountancy firm PriceWaterhouseCoopers. He brings strong financial and governance skills and experience to the Commission.

“I congratulate the new appointees to the Film Commission. Their skills and experience, drawn from a diverse range of activities and backgrounds, will be invaluable to the work of the Commission,” said Judith Tizard.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION

New Zealand Film Commission

The New Zealand Film Commission is responsible for encouraging the making and distribution of New Zealand films and the development of the New Zealand film industry. It is not a producer of films but supports New Zealand films through investment, marketing, industry support and other activities.

Barrie Everard

Currently joint owner and operator of the Berkeley Cinema Group. Barrie also has wide experience in film production and distribution. He has been a producer and executive producer of feature films and documentaries.

Tainui Stephens (Te Rarawa)

A television, radio and film producer and director, currently based in Ngäruawähia. He has excellent industry knowledge, and knowledge of te reo Mäori and tikanga. He will bring a strong Mäori and industry perspective to the Board.

William Somerville

A partner in the accountancy firm PriceWaterhouseCoopers. He has knowledge of the film industry (former Finance Manager of Cinema International Corporation, a large film distribution company) and of the cultural sector. He has considerable governance experience (Deputy Chair of the Auckland City Mission, Trustee on the Melanesian Trust and a Company Director of Trust Investment Management Services).