---
title: "Budget works for and with Auckland"
date: 2002-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14121
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

“This government made a commitment to work in partnership with Auckland, and Budget 2002 continues to reflect an awareness of Auckland’s issues,” Minister Assisting the Prime Minister with Auckland Issues Judith Tizard told the Auckland Budget Lock-up today.

“We’re getting on with the business of rebuilding New Zealand and Auckland plays a crucial role in this rebuilding programme. We are committed to ensuring that Auckland, as New Zealand’s economic powerhouse, is able to keep moving ahead.

“At the same time we are committed to helping Auckland with the social, environmental and cultural issues that go hand-in-hand with the growth this region is experiencing.

“The Refugee Resettlement Package is a good example. Auckland is the arrival and settling point for most of these new New Zealanders. This package will provide more assistance for refugees and those who help them to settle here. There is also $9.6 million over four years for immigration measures.”

Judith Tizard highlighted the government’s commitment to sorting out transport and policing issues in the Auckland region, as well as health and housing issues.

“The $227 million land transport package announced earlier this year will help to deal with major congestion issues in Auckland as well as providing more money for passenger transport and transport alternatives.

“The $2.5 million policing package for Auckland will ensure that frontline police will be able to focus on frontline work.

“Primary health care is a major focus of the government’s work in the health area and we’re putting up to $200 million towards the Meningococcal Vaccine Strategy over a five-year period.

“Housing is closely linked to health. We’re spending nearly $72 million more on extra state houses over the next four years. This is expected to fund about 360 extra houses in areas of greatest need, mainly Auckland.  
“We are also boosting the “Healthy Housing” programme in the parts of Auckland where it is already operating and extending it to other high-risk areas.

Judith Tizard said Auckland will also benefit from education funding in the budget. Auckland has about 32 percent of total New Zealand school pupils, 27 percent of New Zealand’s Tertiary Education Institution (University, Polytechnic, Colleges of Education and Wananga) students and 36 percent of Private Training Establishment students.

“Budget spending in the schools and tertiary sector reflects these figures.A boost of almost $10 million for Auckland’s tertiary institutions will support them to respond more effectively to economic growth and social development needs.

“There is also provision for funding of up to $25 million in 2002-03 for the proposed Auckland Business School. The budget also contains new education funding for Pacific peoples which will have long-term benefits.

Judith Tizard told the Auckland budget lock-up one of the key economic issues for Auckland is developing a skilled population base.

“The government’s Modern Apprenticeships scheme is now available in 27 industries, including key Auckland industries such as tourism and boat building. Today’s budget includes an extra $41 million over the next four years to more than double the number of Modern Apprentices to 6,000 by December next year.”

The government’s commitment to building a sustainable future for tourism in New Zealand will have benefits for Auckland

“In the coming financial year the government will fund a number of tourism initiatives as part of its ongoing response to the recommendations of to the New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010.

“Cultural tourism was identified in the New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010 as a key area needing assistance to reach its potential. Two weeks ago Prime Minister Helen Clark announced that we will contribute $26.5 million over five years for the major Auckland War Memorial Museum redevelopment, which will engage visitors from around the world and have benefits for cultural tourism.

Judith Tizard says with environmental treasures such as the Islands of the Gulf, and responsibility for the country’s busiest airport and ports, Auckland will benefit from extra funding for the environment and biosecurity and border control.

“I am glad that we have once again been able to bring the Budget to Auckland. I am pleased that the Government and Auckland continue to work together in partnership and I am confident that this is the best government for Auckland that we have seen in decades.”