---
title: "Synchrotron cements trans-Tasman science links"
date: 2002-05-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14144
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

The New Zealand and Victorian Governments today cemented a new link in trans-Tasman scientific co-operation, with the announcement New Zealand would join the National Scientific Advisory Committee for the Australian Synchrotron project.

The Committee is made up of leading scientists who are synchrotron users.

The New Zealand Prime Minister, Helen Clark, New Zealand Minister of Research, Science and Technology, Pete Hodgson, and Victorian Premier, Steve Bracks, announced they had agreed an eminent New Zealand scientist would be appointed to the Committee.

“This will bring benefits to both Victoria and New Zealand. I have no doubt that New Zealand researchers and the industry will wish to have access to the state of the art Australian Synchrotron when it comes on line,” Ms Clark said.

“There is a real opportunity for creating mutual benefit for Australia and New Zealand in terms of scientific collaboration, knowledge transfer and innovation.”

Mr Bracks said inviting New Zealand to participate was a natural step in developing a facility to serve research on both sides of the Tasman.

“The Victorian Government has committed to the construction of the Australian Synchrotron at Monash University because it will provide a platform, for Australia and the region, for ground breaking research and development of innovations that will drive new products and new industries,” Mr Bracks said.

“The National Scientific Advisory Committee is assisting development of the performance requirements for synchrotron beamlines so we can build the optimum light source platform to meet local research needs.

“There are already strong scientific links between Australia and New Zealand, and it makes sense to include New Zealand in deliberations on the development of major new research infrastructure.”

Minister Hodgson stressed the practical advantages of the Australian Synchrotron.

“Like Australia, New Zealand has ‘suitcase scientists’ travelling to overseas synchrotrons, and the availability of a third generation light source closer to home will be a real advantage,” Mr Hodgson said.

A synchrotron is a large hollow ring about 60 metres in diameter that produces beams of very bright light, millions of times more powerful than the best conventional microscope.

As a versatile analytical tool, it is used in biological and life sciences, mining, geoscience and to manufacture pharmaceuticals and new-age materials.

The Australian Synchrotron will boost research and development in areas such as biotechnology and advanced manufacturing.

The planning phase is well under way, and site preparation works are due to commence in September 2002, with the facility due to be fully operational in early 2007.