---
title: "New Rule Set To Improve Truck Safety"
date: 2002-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14169
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

New Zealand is set to become the first country in the world requiring trucks to meet minimum standards for stability, Acting Transport Minister Judith Tizard announced today.

Ms Tizard said the new Vehicle Dimensions and Mass Rule, to come into effect on July 1, includes specific new requirements for heavy vehicle stability, to reduce the number of crashes where trucks roll over.

"New Zealand has a high rate of heavy vehicle rollover crashes compared to many other countries. These crashes are potentially very dangerous, which is why the measures we're introducing today are so important."

Trucks rolled over in 29 percent of heavy vehicle crashes attended by the police Commercial Vehicle Inspection Unit from July 1996 to November 1999. This compared to just over three percent in the United States.

"With our winding and difficult network of roads the potential is high for trucks to get into trouble. Truck drivers need to keep their speeds down, especially around corners, but it's also important that the vehicles themselves are as safe and as stable as we can make them. Obviously a stable truck is less likely to flip over than an unstable one."

The Rule also simplifies the mass and dimensions limits of different types of heavy vehicles. It does not include any increase to the maximum weight (44 tonnes) or length (20 metres) of New Zealand's largest vehicle combinations.

Under the Rule heavy vehicles will be required to undergo stability testing before they can be issued with a Certificate of Fitness. Vehicles that do not meet the minimum stability requirement will need to be modified or reduce the height or weight of the loads they carry.

The stability checks will be carried out using a "static roll threshold" calculator developed in New Zealand, which indicates how much force a vehicle can withstand in a steady curve without flipping over.

"These stability calculations provide a clear, measurable indication of what amount of stability is acceptable. Operators will know exactly how high and heavy their vehicles can safely be loaded, and they'll be much less likely to roll over."

Ms Tizard today also announced a separate change that will allow log trucks to operate with longer and lower loads, following successful on-road trials. Under this change, the logging trucks themselves will not be any longer, but they will be allowed to carry loads up to two metres longer than is currently permitted. (See separate statement).

Ms Tizard said neither of these changes were related to the Transit NZ proposals to increase the maximum weights and dimensions of vehicles.

“Work on those proposals is continuing as a separate project. The Ministry of Transport is looking at issues raised in submissions on the proposals.

“The government is aware of the argument that such changes could increase cost-effectiveness. Equally, we recognize that New Zealand roads are some of the most difficult in the world and that many people oppose the idea of bigger trucks. No changes will be made to the rule without extensive public consultation.”

For further technical information see the LTSA website, www.ltsa.govt.nz.