---
title: "$2m boost for iwi, Maori and Pacific services for children"
date: 2002-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14189
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Organisations providing social services to at-risk Maori and Pacific children, young people and families are receiving a funding boost of almost $2 million, Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey and Associate Social Services and Employment (Social Services) Minister Tariana Turia announced today.

The announcement covers the final allocation of funds in 2001-2002 for:  
·Maori Youth Contestable Fund - $675,000;  
·Iwi and Maori Provider and Workforce Development - $948,000; and  
·Pacific People's Provider Development Fund - $326,000  
which were established in the 2001 Budget to support 'for community, by community' programmes which strengthen whanau and families.

Steve Maharey said the money will help iwi, Maori and Pacific peoples to more effectively deliver social services to their communities.

"The ongoing development of community sector social service providers is something the government is strongly committed too. Research shows that community organisations need better resourcing if they are to effectively meet the needs of children, whanau and families - this includes assistance with training, infrastructure and set-up funding.

"We want to work in partnership with the community sector when it comes to helping families in need. These community-based organisations deliver essential services, including family violence counselling and home parenting skills," Steve Maharey said.

Tariana Turia said "Every difficult situation must be viewed as an opportunity for change. I believe iwi and Maori community organisations will relish the challenge. This funding will greatly assist in ensuring the challenge will be met and the people will receive a 'gold star' service."

"It is important for tangatawhenua service providers to undertake training on the 'strengths perspective' to the provision of services to whanau. It is also important to take the opportunity to demonstrate that, despite the difficulties of some whanau, they have within them innate abilities to care and nurture.

"The advanced skill in this work is to tap whanau potential, nurture it and allow it to flourish. The 'strengths approach' to this work is about tapping the rich resource, which whakapapa links give. These links must be maintained, " Mrs Turia added.

1.Maori Youth Contestable Fund.  
This fund helps provide programmes for youth who are committing serious and frequent offences, and who are at risk of being placed outside their families or in a Child, Youth and Family residence. The $675,000 will purchase additional workforce training for iwi and Maori organisations providing services to such youth. Of this, $240,000 will be paid to training organisations. 66 service providers around the country will receive a total of $435,000, or just under $6,600 each, to help pay for social workers' course enrolment fees and other training.

2.Iwi and Maori Provider and Workforce Development.  
Iwi and Maori organisations providing social services to at-risk children, young people and families will get $948,794 to help them further develop and improve services. The money is the final round of allocations involving a total of just under $3 million set aside in the current financial year for provider development and workforce capacity building. $468,794 will go directly to service providers. Another $300,000 is for five organisations providing supervision and advisory services to iwi and Maori providers, $100,000 will be spent evaluating capacity and capability building strategies and $80,000 will help establish a national Iwi and Maori Provider Association.

3.Pacific People's Provider Development Fund.  
$326,000 is being allocated to assist providers of social services to Pacific people to develop the way they work. Three Pacific consortiums will receive $58,000 each to implement their business plans. Two are in Auckland (Pacific island Aiga/Kainga Cultural Social Service and Auckland Pacific Island Cultural Social Service Provider Association) and one in Wellington (the Pacific Island Cultural Social Services Trust). Another $143,000 will fund 17 individual organisations around the country and $9170 will fund the establishment of a mentoring programme.

**Organisation** **Location** Huakina Development Trust Waiuku Maatua Whangai o Kirikiriroa Hamilton Te Roopu O Wai Ora Incorporated Auckland Waahi Whanui Trust Huntly Te Aupouri Maori Trust Board Kaitaia Te Runanga O Whaingaroa Iwi Social Kaeo Te Whanau O Waipareira Auckland Whakapakiri National Ngati Kahungunu ki Poneke Community Services Lower Hutt Te Runanganui o Taranaki Whanui Te Upoko o te Ika Te Korowai Aroha National Te Runanga o Raukawa Otaki/Levin Tui Ora Taranaki Te Roopu A Iwi O Te Arawa Rotorua Wairaka Kokiri trust Whakatane Whakaatu Whanaunga Trust Opotiki Te Puna Oranga Christchurch **TOTAL** **$468,794**     Individual (non-consortium) organisations being funded under the Pacific People’s Provider Development Fund:   **Organisation** **Location** Fale Malu Pasifika Women’s Refuge Auckland Lima Fesoasoani Community Trust Auckland Tongan Tamaki Langafonua Community Centre Auckland Matagi E Fa Trust South Auckland Pacific World South Auckland Tafaoata Trust South Auckland Mapu I Manurewa South Auckland Pasefika Mana Home Budgeting Advocacy and Counselling South Auckland Li’olima Social Services Trust South Auckland Auckland Pacific Island Budgeting Service Charitable Trust South Auckland Lalotoa I Aotearoa South Auckland Tongan Association of Hamilton Hamilton K’aute Pasifika Central North Island Te Akamata Anga Ou Wellington-Wairarapa Pacific Trust Canterbury Canterbury Pacific Island Evaluation Canterbury South Sound Missionary Trust Dunedin **TOTAL for individual organisations** **$143,000**