---
title: "MPs’ New Zealand Music Quiz results show encouraging awareness of local talent"
date: 2002-05-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14014
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

Judith Tizard has praised her parliamentary colleagues for their high level of local music knowledge, as revealed in the results of her annual New Zealand Music Quiz today.

“The average number of right answers to the 20-question quiz (with a possible 25 points) was an outstanding 16. This doesn’t include the extra points awarded to those who interpreted question five to their own benefit by listing as many favourite New Zealand songs of all time as possible!

“Many MPs sought help from staff or family members, but whether they already knew the answers, asked around or did their research, I’m delighted my colleagues took such an interest in wanting to get the answers right.

“As with last year, the point of the exercise was to get them thinking about the great range of music on offer in this country during New Zealand Music Month. The results show a greater awareness this year than last, and that means New Zealand Music Month is doing its job. I’d like to congratulate the New Zealand Music Industry Commission and the music industry on another great month.”

Every MP who entered the quiz receives a copy of the highest-selling compilation of New Zealand songs ever, Nature’s Best, the APRA collection of New Zealand’s top 30 songs of the past 75 years.

The winners are:

“Best Total (with only one favourite song listed)” - Matt Robson (23 points); Dianne Yates (22 points).

“Best Total (by creatively interpreting the rules)” - Tariana Turia and Tari (office) – 60 points, included 43 points for 43 answers to question five, “What is your favourite NZ song of all time?” (The enthusiastic interpretation of the question yielded an impressive list of songs)

"Bravest Attempt" – Jill Pettis (1 point for the Aramoho School Song being her favourite NZ song, which she will sing upon picking up her prize)

“Political Correctness” – Ken Shirley – For best explanation of party policy within the quiz (Q5. Favourite song: Fred Dagg’s You don’t know how lucky you are. Q7. What does a NZ On Air “plugger” do? Answer: “Hassles”).

“Most Sporting Attempt” – Rt Hon Jonathan Hunt – for offering to answer questions on Australia/England cricket tests between the two World Wars, but nevertheless answering five questions and getting 4 correct answers.

"Pacifier Award" - Tim Barnett – (for writing "Jihad" as Jim Anderton did last year, then correcting himself with “Shihad”)

"Honourable Mentions" – MPs who scored 20 or above: Jim Anderton (21 points plus 3 songs); Gerry Brownlee (21 points); Belinda Vernon (21); David Cunliffe (20 points plus 26 songs); John Tamihere (20 points plus 3 songs); Marian Hobbs (20 points); David Carter (20 points)

“Best MP Wannabe” – Liisa McMillan, National Radio music producer – 44 points including 22 correct answers, 22 favourite songs, and a fine instinct for making the rules work for her.

The question "What is your favourite New Zealand song of all time?" revealed a wide range of musical tastes amongst Parliamentarians. “Nature” by the Fourmyula remains popular, as do songs by Dave Dobbyn, Crowded House and Split Enz.

Among the many songs listed were: Bic Runga – Sway; Mark Williams – Taking it all in stride; The Crocodiles – Tears; Southside of Bombay – What’s the Time Mr Wolf?; Patea Maori Club – Poi E; Peter Cape – Taumarunui (on the main trunk line); Chris Knox - Not Given Lightly; Straitjacket Fits – She Speeds; The Mutton Birds – Dominion Rd; Prince Tui Teka – E Ipo; Golden Harvest – I Need Your Love; Matapihi - Te Matapihi Moemoea;The Mutton Birds – Anchor Me; Fur Patrol – Lydia.

More information on New Zealand Music Month is on the NZ Music Industry Commission website: www.nzmusic.org.nz