---
title: "Budget boost for sport"
date: 2002-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14075
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Sport and Recreation
---

Sport, fitness and leisure funding is being increased to make up for the drop in lottery profits and to recognise the progress being made in implementing the government review into sport, fitness and leisure.

"In last year's budget we signaled our commitment to that review by allocating almost $100 million over five years to implement its recommendations," Sport, Fitness and Leisure Minister Trevor Mallard said today.

"An increase of $4 million (including $2 million to take the Prime Minister's scholarships from $3 million to $5 million) had been allocated for 2002-03. However the agency has been established and is progressing well, so I have brought forward a further $5 million - a total of $9 million extra over last year.

"We've also recognised the impact that a drop in lottery profits will have on the sport and recreation sector by appropriating a further $3 million to off set that decrease in funding.

"Next month the new agency will be launched and more information will be available about its priorities and direction.

"Work through the new agency is focused around the government's priorities to increase participation in sport and physical activity. We recognise that there are considerable health and social benefits in this. The new agency also has a focus on supporting our most talented athletes to fulfill their potential," Trevor Mallard said.