---
title: "Economic innovation package - outline and costs"
date: 2002-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14051
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

01. Strategic Sector Implementation: supports government's efforts in focal areas of biotech, ICT and creative industries. Jim Anderton with Pete Hodgson and Paul Swain as Taskforce Ministers. Funding from Vote: Economic, Industry and Regional Development (E,I&RD). $7.664 million in 2002-03, $6.640 million in 2003-04, $8.142 million in 2004-05 and $9.623 million in 2005-06 and outyears
02. Strategic Investment - to attract more domestic and foreign investment to high growth and value adding sectors. Joint statement with Jim Sutton. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD $6.646 million in 2002-03, $7.168 million in 2003-04, and $8.125 million in 2004-05 and outyears
03. Fast Forward New Zealand. Jim Anderton. Funding from Vote E,I&RD. $2 million in 2002-03 and outyears. (pre-released)
04. Brand NZ - to develop, manage and promote Brand New Zealand. Funding from Vote E,I&RD. $1.5 million in 2002-03 and 2003-04, $1.625 million in 2004-05 and $2 million in 2005-06 and outyears.
05. Business in the Community and Company Rebuilders: supports provision of services by these two groups. Jim Anderton. Funding from Vote E,I&RD. $320,000 in 2002-03 only. (pre-released)
06. Tertiary Students Working in Business - SNAP: (one year implementation of SNAP by Student Job Search). Joint statement with Steve Maharey. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD transferred to Vote: Work and Income. $484m in 2002-03 only. (pre-released)
07. Business Clusters - funding to assist cluster development, facilitation and research into clusters. Funding from Vote E,I&RD. $1 million in 2002-03 and outyears.
08. Integrated Service Delivery: between FoRST and Industry NZ (which will be delivering FoRST's Tech NZ programmes under contract), Joint statement with Pete Hodgson. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD transferred to Vote: RS&T. $1 million in 2002-03 and outyears.
09. Research Consortia: Pete Hodgson with Jim Anderton. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD which has been transferred to Vote: RS&T. $6.3 million in 2002-03 and outyears.
10. Expansion of Technology for Business Growth programme: funds some of excess demand for a popular programme - Joint statement with Pete Hodgson. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD which has been transferred to Vote: RS&T. $3.9 million in 2002-03 and outyears.
11. Polytechnic Regional Development Fund: Joint statement with Steve Maharey. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD. $1 million in 2002-03 and $2 million in 2003-04 and 2004-05 only. (pre-released)
12. Improved Internet Access (Broad band initiative): Joint statement with Trevor Mallard. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD and Education. Funding subject to tender from telecommunications companies.
13. Tourism strategy: transfer of funds from Vote: E,I&RD to Vote: Tourism to implement the NZ tourism strategy . Funding of $2.100 million in 2002-03, $2.2 million in 2003-04 and $2.5 million in 2004-05 and outyears transferred to Tourism.
14. Te Kapinga: Maori Economic Development Facilitation. Funding from Vote: E,I&RD. $200,000 in 2002-03 and outyears.