---
title: "$1.3 boost for Hutt tertiary institutions"
date: 2002-05-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14676
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Hutt Valley tertiary institutions are to receive $360,858 in new funding for projects to help it respond more effectively to local economic growth and social development needs, Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey and Hutt South MP Trevor Mallard announced today.

The funding comes from the Tertiary Education Strategic Change Fund established last year to provide one-off grants for tertiary institutions to adapt to the changing tertiary education system. Public tertiary institutions were invited to submit applications for funding from the Strategic Change Fund and the funds were allocated according to their share of the overall student roll.

An additional $10 million is provided for in next week’s budget to ensure continuous improvement in future years. A share of this funding will be available to tertiary organisations and others on a contestable basis.

“Our region needs a more coordinated and coherent tertiary education sector, strongly linked with local industries and the community. The funding announced today will support tertiary institutions in the Hutt to achieve this goal.

“The tertiary education sector has been through a difficult decade of declining public investment and a single-minded focus on student enrolments. The time has long since come to get some strategy back into the system,” Trevor Mallard said.

The funding is being used for a number of specific projects:  
·Wellington Institute of Technology (total allocation: $514,254) is investing in a virtual campus development which aims to create greater flexibility in delivery and greater student control of course components. This will be achieved by developing an interface between students and WelTec, creating access to information and interactive communication across all administrative and teaching environments.

·In partnership with Victoria University and Massey University, WelTec is also establishing an incubator for the rapid prototyping of new ideas. The project aims to provide an opportunity for students and advance manufacturing employers to work together to meet regional economic and employment needs.  
. . / 2

·In another collaborative project, WelTec and Whitireia Community Polytechnic are working to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of polytechnic education provision in the Wellington region. The polytechnic councils are to establish a regional forum to explore regional needs. Whitireia Community Polytechnic will also be developing e-learning and e-business with its funding.

·the Open Polytechnic of New Zealand (total allocation: $864,899) has received funding for its Open Mind Online project, improving student access to tertiary programmes through a state-of-the-art web-based delivery facility. The Open Polytechnic plans to make majors in two degree programmes and their associated diplomas available by this delivery method next year.

Steve Maharey said projects funded by the Strategic Change Fund will support the goals of New Zealand’s first Tertiary Education Strategy, which was released earlier this week.

“These funding decisions demonstrate that the Government is prepared to back the Strategy with significant additional funding,” Steve Maharey said.