---
title: "Te Ture Whenua Maori Amendment Bill passed"
date: 2002-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14176
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

The passage of Te Ture Whenua Maori Amendment Bill will improve the ability of Maori to retain, occupy, use, develop and control their own land, demonstrating the our commitment to improving Maori control of Maori land, said the Minister of Maori Affairs, Parekura Horomia.

The Bill completed its passage through Parliament on 28 May 2002. The new legislation will come into force on 1 July 2002.

"The Maori Land Court’s new mediation provisions for representation issues are a major innovation that will assist in the resolution of representation disputes. Solutions arrived at by mediation with the people directly involved, rather than made by a Judge, then everyone will be better off.

“Access to land-locked land has a very long history and I am proud to be associated with a Bill that provides an equitable solution to the problem. It is right and proper that the Maori Land Court have full powers to deal with the problems of land-locked Maori land.

“We have simplified the owner consent requirements for land dealings and extended the definition of a ‘long term lease’ from more than 42 years to more than 52 years.

“We have also given greater clarity to the nature and status of occupation orders which can now also be inherited where appropriate, providing more certainty and assisting in the administration of Maori land.

“Some of the changes broaden the jurisdiction of the Maori Land Court, so we have introduced additional new requirements to ensure that new Judges appointed to the Court will also have knowledge and experience of Te Reo Maori, Tikanga Maori and the Treaty.

“I would like to acknowledge the work of my predecessors, Hon Tau Henare and Hon Dover Samuels, of the Maori Council other Maori groups, people and others throughout Aotearoa. The Maori Affairs Select Committee made a key contribution to the refinement and passage of this legislation with their unanimous recommendations.”