---
title: "Another breeding success"
date: 2002-05-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14147
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

Conservation Minister Sandra Lee says she and her department are celebrating another native bird breeding success.  
Ms Lee says the best kakapo breeding season in decades has been followed by DOC in Southland reporting a dramatic increase in the southern New Zealand dotterel population.  
She says the dotterel population has increased for the second breeding season in a row due to feral cat control measures, using 1080 poison, in key breeding sites.  
“ Last years population count was 175 birds and this has increased to 205 birds. This is one of the most positive results we have had with this species for some time.”  
"This tiny shore bird, which now only breeds on the barren Stewart Island high country, was down to 62 birds in 1992, and declining rapidly until Dr John Dowding established a monitoring and nest protection programme.  
"He found rats and feral cats on the island were a major threat to the birds and poison stations were set up near the last five known nesting sites."

Ms Lee said dotterels were particularly vulnerable to feral cat and rat predation as they nest in the open high country near the edge of the forest.

“This gives cats plenty of cover to hunt from,” Ms Lee said.

Ms Lee said DOC staff have been working in severe winter conditions on Stewart Island maintaining trap and poison lines around the nesting sites to ensure the birds were protected from feral cats.

The only other surviving dotterel population is found in the north of the North Island where they nest in open coastal areas that provide less cover for predators. Unfortunately they suffer from human disturbance on these more popular northern beaches.

On Stewart Island the male birds bear the brunt of feral cat attacks as they take the night shift for egg incubation.

DOC Southern islands Area manager Greg Lind said there was a huge difference in expected life spans between the males in the two populations.

“Our surveys have shown the North Island male dotterels live for an average of 13 years but Stewart Island male birds only survive for about three years so we have a serious gender imbalance as well as a small population to build from,” he said.