---
title: "Answers to Judith Tizard’s New Zealand Music Month Quiz"
date: 2002-05-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14015
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

1\. Which major New Zealand rock band has recently changed its name to Pacifier?  
Shihad - 1 point

2\. What New Zealand record label turned 21 this year?  
Flying Nun - 1 point

3\. New Zealand's first electronica musician set up a studio in Wellington within 1km of the Beehive in the 1960s. He died last year and in June Concert FM will feature a major documentary series on his life. Who was he?  
Douglas Lilburn - 1 point

4\. Name the 1969 Fourmyula song about a popular ice-cream “vendor”?  
Mr Whippy - 1 point

5\. What is your favourite New Zealand song of all time?  
Each song gets 1 point

6\. Andy Lynch of Zed is the son of one half of a major New Zealand pop duo from the 1960s. Name the singer and the duo.  
Suzanne Lynch/Donaldson – The Chicks - 1 point

7\. What does a New Zealand On Air “plugger” do?  
Promotes the NZ On Air hit discs to commercial radio, encourages radio programmers to put NZ songs on their playlists - 1 point

8\. What is the current occupation of Joe Williams, who was the songwriter and lead vocalist for reggae group Aotearoa?  
Judge Joe Williams – Chief Maori Land Court Judge (also Deputy Chairperson of Waitangi Tribunal, currently acting Chair) - 1 point

9\. Bic Runga had two songs on the soundtrack for major Hollywood film American Pie. Another New Zealand singer-songwriter has followed in her footsteps, making it to the soundtrack of the film America’s Sweethearts with the song Falling In Love Again. Who is she?  
Anika Moa - 1 point

10\. Like Fur Patrol’s Lydia the year before, once again a New Zealand band has a current hit with a song named after a girl. Who do goodshirt sing about?  
Sophie - 1 point

11\. What is the highest-selling compilation of New Zealand songs ever?  
Nature’s Best – the APRA compilation of NZ songs over 75 years - 1 point

12\. Name the Tongan-born steel guitar legend who has recorded over 50 albums, written over 200 songs and recently released the album Our Serenade.  
Bill Sevesi - 1 point

13\. Waikato University recently awarded honorary doctorates to three musicians – two are brothers and the third is a renowned Maori musician. Who are they?  
Tim and Neil Finn, Hirini Melbourne - 3 points

14\. What pop bands do you associate with the New Zealand musician who has also composed for orchestras, choirs, brass and pipe bands, From Scratch, theatrical group The Front Lawn, and the soundtracks to the film An Angel at my Table, the television series Street Legal and the NZ Festival 2002 production The World’s Wife?  
Blam Blam Blam, The Mutton Birds (also The Plague, The Whizz Kids) - 1 point for each band

15\. Name the organisation that coordinates New Zealand Music Month with the support of the New Zealand music, radio and retail industry.  
NZ Music Industry Commission - 1 point

16\. What is the name of the New Zealand DJ who is currently ranked as number three in the world standings?  
P-Money (Pete Wadams) - 1 point

17\. Who is the biggest selling female New Zealand popular musician of all time?  
Bic Runga - 1 point

18\. The new book – An Ordinary Joker – and accompanying CD profile the life and songs of the man who wrote popular New Zealand folk songs including Taumarunui (on the main trunk line) and Down the hall on a Saturday night. Who was he?  
Peter Cape - 1 point

19\. Name the New Zealand opera singer whose self-titled debut album sold 45,000 copies in its first month of release in New Zealand.  
Hayley Westenra - 1 point

20\. The MP for Auckland Central Question:  
This musician named his album Vine Street Stories after his St Mary’s Bay home…  
Greg Johnson - 1 point

Total – 25 points (or more if more favourite songs)

Thank you for doing your part to support New Zealand music during New Zealand Music Month, May 2002.