---
title: "Budget 2002 - Disability initiatives"
date: 2002-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14330
ministers:
  - Ruth Dyson
portfolios:
  - Disability Issues
---

People with disabilities will benefit from a number of key initiatives in this year’s Budget, Disability Issues Minister Ruth Dyson said today. The initiatives include:

Vocational services

Vocational services for people with disabilities will get a funding boost of $44.6 million over the next four years:  
·$24.58 million to implement the government’s vocational services strategy, Pathways to Inclusion.  
·$2.73 million to repeal the Disabled Persons Employment Promotion Act and revise the under-rate workers’ permit system; and  
·$17.28 million to restore the time-limited funding of two initiatives due to run out the end of this financial year – the Job Support programme for people with disabilities, and support for school leavers with very high and complex needs.

Community housing

Housing New Zealand has been allocated a further $20.53 million to provide housing in the community for former residents of the Kimberley Centre in Levin and Braemar Hospital in Nelson, on top of $2.9 million announced in October 2001.

Approximately 375 Kimberley residents will be resettled in the community over the next three years, while 80 Braemar residents will be resettled over a 14-month period, beginning in July.

Disability Issues Directorate

The Disability Issues Directorate in the Ministry of Health will receive an additional $52 million in 2002/03, representing a 3.7 per cent growth in funding.

Of this money, $12.5 million is earmarked for price increases for aged residential care services - on top of a similar price increase from 1 December 2001.

Other initiatives include:  
·Kimberley and Braemar deinstitutionalisation project transition costs;  
·increased services for people with high and complex needs, and those who will come under the proposed compulsory care legislation for people with an intellectual disability who commit imprisonable offences;  
·volume growth in community support services such as home support and carer support; and national consistency.

Special education

New funding for special education includes:  
·$5.2 million over four years for best practice research and professional development to help improve learning support for students with special education needs;  
·$366,000 over four years for scholarships to increase Maori speech language therapists; and  
·$225,000 over four years for scholarships to increase the number of sign language interpreters fluent in Maori.

Sports and recreation

One-off funding of $90,000 has been allocated in 2001/2002 to support Paralympic and other sports initiatives for people with disabilities:  
·$10,000 for Paralympics New Zealand to develop a website on the 2004 Paralympics in Athens;  
·$25,000 to support the purchase of a support boat to enable the Paralympic Sailing Programme to develop a high-performance base in Auckland in conjunction with Sailability New Zealand and the New Zealand Yacht Squadron; and  
·the development of educational resources to increase New Zealanders’ understanding of people with disabilities in sport, and give people with disabilities full information on sport and physical recreation opportunities.

Talking Books

Funding of $194,000 in 2002/2003 and $776,000 in 2003/04 and out years will be provided from Vote:Health for postal services that are currently provided by New Zealand Post for people who are blind.

The funding will cover free postage of Talking Books to and from the New Zealand Foundation for the Blind library in Auckland and its members, as well as labelled articles for blind people such as cassette tapes, Braille items, computer disks and talking book machines.

Human Rights

The Human Rights Commission will receive $1.535 million over three years to develop a National Plan of Action that identifies priorities for human rights protections.

The Budget also provides for increased operational funding for the commission, the establishment of an Equal Employment Opportunities Commissioner within the commission, and more funding for the Equal Employment Opportunities Trust so it can reach more workplaces and increase its research base.