---
title: "Last paper certificate of land title issued"
date: 2002-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14197
ministers:
  - Matt Robson
portfolios:
  - Land Information
---

Land Information Minister Matt Robson today signed the last paper certificate of land title to be issued, at a ceremony marking the completion of Landonline stage one and the opening of the new LINZ Centre in Auckland.

“Issuing the last paper title literally marks the end of an era, says Matt Robson.

“For 150 years, deeds and titles to land have been in paper form. In the early years, the land deeds were all painstakingly handwritten on goatskin paper and possession was 9/10ths of the law - whoever held the deed was the owner of the land.

“Land title and survey systems physically define people’s major assets – their homes, their farms, their businesses.

“Around 700 thousand title documents, including new titles and change transfers, and around 14 thousand survey plans, are dealt with by LINZ each year.

“Landonline brings faster service, standardised procedures, consistency, and enhanced security to the processing of land title transactions. And, of course, the State guarantee of title remains in place, exactly as before.

“Stage two of Landonline, which is expected to be piloted later this year, will bring reduced cost through digital electronic lodgement and almost instant routine title transactions, says Matt Robson.

Media Enquiries: Barry Ebert \[press secretary] 021 636416 or 04 471 9931 or Mike Bodnar \[Communications Manager, Landonline] 027 208 9453 or 04 498 9683