---
title: "Government contributes $100,000 to support Sir Edmund Hillary Trust and preparations for Everest ascent 50th anniversary"
date: 2002-05-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14145
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

The government has allocated $100,000 to support preparations for the 50th anniversary celebrations of Sir Edmund Hillary’s historic ascent of Mt Everest next year, and the formation of the Sir Edmund Hillary Trust.

Acting Arts, Culture and Heritage Minister Judith Tizard announced the funding with Sir Edmund and Lady Hillary at Parliament today, the 49th anniversary of the first successful ascent of Mt Everest by Sir Edmund and Tenzing Norgay.

“We are delighted to support the establishment of The Sir Edmund Hillary Trust, which will facilitate and coordinate the anniversary celebrations and ensure a legacy to honour the extraordinary achievements of our greatest living hero,” said Judith Tizard.

“The celebrations next year will not only commemorate the first successful ascent of Everest, but will also recognise Sir Edmund’s numerous other mountaineering feats, Antarctic adventures and his legacy as an outstanding humanitarian.

“The Sir Edmund Hillary Trust will help to realise Sir Edmund’s profound wish of seeing his life’s work in helping the Nepalese people and fostering strong bonds between our two countries continue well into the future. The Trust will provide a means by which to undertake activities for the benefit of New Zealanders in areas close to Sir Edmund’s heart.”

In response, Sir Edmund said “I am delighted that the government is getting behind the preparations to mark the 50th anniversary of the journey Sherpa Tenzing Norgay and I made to the summit of Mt Everest – a journey which changed my life in many ways.

“I am fully supportive of the programme and thrilled that they have had the courage and energy to undertake it.”

A subsidiary of the Sir Edmund Hillary Trust, the Hillary Project, will be the operating arm of the Trust. A project team, led by Porter Novelli New Zealand, will raise money for both the 50th anniversary celebrations and for the Trust to fund humanitarian and environmental causes in Sir Edmund’s name.

“It is important to honour New Zealand’s heroes appropriately, especially when they are so willing to be role models for our young people and young people in other nations,” said Judith Tizard.

“This is a fitting tribute to Sir Edmund, especially in the United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage and United Nations International Year of Mountains. I am very much looking forward to next year’s celebrations and to seeing Sir Edmund’s good work continued well into the future through the Sir Edmund Hillary Trust.”