---
title: "Budget meets highest standards of financial management"
date: 2002-05-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14043
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark said today that Budget 2002 was a tribute to the government's responsible approach to financial management and the delivery of social assistance.

"The message from today's budget is that this is a smart, active government which is getting on with the business of rebuilding New Zealand," Helen Clark said.

"A strong surplus and a reassuring set of fiscal indicators mean we are meeting the highest standards of financial management.

"The underlying strength of the economy has been demonstrated in how well it has performed even since the impact of the 11 September terrorist attacks in the United States.

"We are acknowledging again today that building the skills and talents of all New Zealanders is critical to efforts to create a more knowledge-based and innovative society.

"The budget also reflects the government's commitment to the key themes of social inclusion and cohesion.

"The announcements give momentum to our programme by investing further in tertiary education, skills training, research, business support programmes and other growth and partnership strategies.

"The government is also giving effect to a decision to make biotechnology, information and communications technology, and the creative industries the focus of the investment and innovation strategies.

"In summary Budget 2002 continues to demonstrate the government's commitment to programmes that will help ensure opportunity and security for all New Zealanders," Helen Clark said.