---
title: "More help on the way for victims of serious crime"
date: 2009-10-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/more-help-way-victims-serious-crime
ministers:
  - Simon Power
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

A package of initiatives designed to provide additional assistance for victims of serious crime was announced today by Justice Minister Simon Power.

In a speech at the Victim Support biannual conference Mr Power outlined eight initiatives to improve the range of entitlements and services victims of crime will have access to.

They are:

- A significant increase in the funeral grant to families of homicide victims.
- A court attendance grant of $124 per person per day for up to five adult members of a homicide victim's family.
- An increase in the discretionary grant for families of homicide victims which are suffering financial difficulties, from $1,500 to $5,000.
- The formation of a homicide support service which will provide four paid homicide support co-ordinators to work with Victim Support.
- A court service for victims of sexual violence which give them access to a trained adviser who understands the dynamics of sexual violence cases and the needs of victims.
- A grant to contribute to the cost of expenses incurred as a result of sexual violence, such as replacing items of clothing collected for forensic evidence.
- Increases in the amount of financial assistance available to help victims of serious crime attend High Court trials and Parole Board hearings.
- A DVD and three pamphlets outlining the court process and the support services available.

Funding for the initiatives will come from revenue generated by the Offender Levy and funding from the disestablished Sentencing Council.  The Offender Levy is expected to generate $13.6 million over the first four years.

The Sentencing (Offender Levy) Amendment Bill, which is expected to be passed next week, imposes a $50 levy on all convicted offenders at the point of sentencing in court. It will be collected after reparation and before fines, and is in addition to any sentence or court order.

"This Government is aware that victims of crime, and in particular victims of serious crimes, face significant financial and emotional costs as a result of the crimes committed against them.  We have made a commitment to increase the amount of support available to these victims.

"I'm confident these eight entitlements and services will make a real difference in the lives of victims," Mr Power said.

The entitlements and services for victims of serious crime will be implemented from November 2009.

"I am particularly pleased that every convicted offender will provide funding for these new services for victims of serious crime through the Offender Levy.  I think it is important that offenders contribute to addressing the harm their criminal behaviour causes victims.

"This Government has made a commitment to increase the amount of support available to victims of crime, and I am delighted we are making significant progress towards this."