---
title: "Consumers play an active role in the economy"
date: 2002-08-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14745
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Consumer Affairs
---

“Consumers play an important role in the development and growth of New Zealand’s economy, but we need to ensure they have the information they need to make informed choices,” says Consumer Affairs Minister Judith Tizard.

“The Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Ministry of Economic Development post-election briefing on consumer affairs says consumers are not simply beneficiaries of a thriving and sustainable economy, they play an active role in its development and growth.

“However there are a number of barriers to consumers having choices and making effective decisions that the government will continue to address,” says Judith Tizard.

“One of the main challenges is in the way consumers are able to access and use information. There can be significant consequences of decisions made on the basis of imperfect information. It’s important that consumers are able to have trust and confidence in products, services and institutions.

“There is already much that the government does for the consumer in the areas of monitoring and law enforcement.

“I hope soon to introduce the Consumer Credit Bill, which aims to change the law to protect consumers against unfair credit and lending practices, and I also hope to have the Consumer Protection (Definitions of Goods and Services) Bill reported back to Parliament as soon as possible. This Bill aims to bring utility goods and services as well as computer software under the Consumer Guarantees Act.

“The Ministry has been involved in the development and implementation of industry self-regulation schemes, GM-free labelling issues, and is planning a project to review consumer protection law and its enforcement.

“In addition, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs has been focusing on providing information to vulnerable groups within the consumer population. I’m keen to see this continue and expand to other consumers who may not have had access to information because of language barriers.”

The Ministry of Consumer Affairs advises that its objectives in the next three years include:  
·reducing the transaction costs in dealings between consumers and suppliers;  
·confident consumers;  
·adequate information for purchasing decisions;  
·ethical trading practices;  
·fair competition in the marketplace;  
·eliminating unfair trade practices such as pyramid selling schemes;  
·giving consumers access to complaint resolution and redress;  
·representation of consumers’ interests at decision-making levels.

“The government’s most important task in the next three years is to improve the conditions for growth. We want to pursue our economic and social goals in a way that is consistent with the values of fairness, security and opportunity,” says Judith Tizard.

“It’s important to continue to break down the barriers that consumers face so that they are able to confidently play an active role in the growth and development of the economy.”

Further material about the Ministry of Consumer Affairs ministerial briefing:  
http://www.med.govt.nz/about/bim2002/cons-aff/  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs website: http://www.consumer-ministry.govt.nz