---
title: "Government exceeds Modern Apprenticeships target"
date: 2002-08-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14660
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The Government’s flagship Modern Apprenticeships programme has exceeded expectations, with new figures showing more than 3,000 young New Zealanders are now signed up under the scheme.

Speaking at the Industry Training Federation Conference in Wellington today, Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey released figures showing that there were 3,254 Modern Apprentices in training at 30 June 2002. This represents a 23% increase over the past three months.

“We have exceeded our target of having 3,000 young people in Modern Apprenticeships training this year.

“This is a significant milestone and sets us firmly on the path to achieve our next target – doubling the number of Modern Apprentices to 6,000 by December 2003.

“Over half of the Modern Apprentices (1,972) were aged 18 or younger when they started their training. It’s good to see that one of our key aims for Modern Apprenticeships – of getting young people back into industry training – is being so well achieved.

“Figures for this quarter also show a 20% increase in the number of young Maori taking up Modern Apprenticeships. This brings the number of Maori involved to 536.

“All around the country, I meet both Modern Apprentices and employers who are enthusiastic and committed to this programme. The structured training path and assistance provided by the Modern Apprenticeships co-ordinators really helps trainees to achieve and, in the case of industry, to solve their own skill shortage problems.

“I congratulate everyone involved in building the Modern Apprenticeships success story. This includes the 28 industry groups already involved, the 46 Modern Apprenticeships co-ordinators, Skill New Zealand and, of course, the 3,254 young apprentices themselves,” Steve Maharey said.

. . / 2  
Steve Maharey also released Industry Training statistics for the year to 30 June, which show that 78,240 New Zealanders were involved in structured workplace learning. This figure is 18% up on the same time last year – and 14% higher than the number of industry trainees at the last quarter.

Peter Palmer, Industry Training Manager, Skill New Zealand, (04) 801 5588.

Margaret Griffin, Communications Manager, Skill New Zealand, (04) 801 5588.

Modern Apprenticeships statistics as at 30 June 2002  
Aeronautical Engineering 16, Agriculture 217, Architectural Aluminium 3, Bakery 94, Boating165, Building & Construction536, Contracting 35, Dairy Manufacturing 3,  
Electricity Supply 132, Electrotechnology 282, Engineering 515, Flooring 72,Food Processing 1,Forestry 408, Furniture 44, Horticulture 112, Hospitality 19, Motor 373, Plastics 7, Printing 86, Public Sector 53, Retail 3,  
Road Transport 12, Seafood 4, Sports Turf 25, Telecommunications 36,Tourism 1, Total 3254