---
title: "Immigration Briefing to Incoming Minister"
date: 2002-08-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14764
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Immigration
---

Immigration will continue to contribute to New Zealand’s economic growth, Immigration Minister Lianne Dalziel said today on the release of briefing papers to her as the incoming Minister.

“During the last term of government, we introduced the New Zealand Immigration Programme, prioritising skilled and business migrants. We have also introduced a Work-to-Residence programme in response to the skill shortages identified by New Zealand businesses.

“But as the Briefing states:  
‘Immigration has an important but secondary role to play in building the skilled and knowledgeable workforce that New Zealand needs to achieve this growth.’

“That is why the Accredited Employer Programme for the Talent Visa includes the employer’s track record of, and ongoing commitment to, industry training. Our primary interest as a government remains with developing our own human capital.

“In particular, the Briefing suggests further consideration of immigration policy relating to:

·Overseas students

·A review of the Investor Category

·English language testing

·Enforceable standards for immigration consultants

“The Briefing highlights the fact that we are enjoying historically high and positive net migration and flows of people for residence and temporary entry. Our current level of net migration gain is driven by more Kiwis coming home, fewer Kiwis leaving and increased immigration. It is the combination of the three that gives New Zealand the first period of positive net migration we have experienced in years.

“The Briefing identifies that demand has been particularly high in the General Skills Category and from work and student visa applicants, and this is creating infrastructure pressure on the NZIS, which we are working to address,” Lianne Dalziel said.