---
title: "Portfolio Allocations"
date: 2002-08-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14687
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

1\. **Rt Hon Helen Clark**  
Prime Minister  
Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Ministerial Services  
Minister in Charge of the NZ Security Intelligence Service 2. **Hon Dr Michael Cullen**  
Deputy Prime Minister  
Minister of Finance  
Minister of Revenue Leader of the House 3. **Hon Jim Anderton**  
Minister for Economic Development  
Minister for Industry and Regional Development Minister Responsible for the Public Trust  
Associate Minister of Health 4. [1](#Note) 5. **Hon Phil Goff**  
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade  
Minister of Justice 6. **Hon Annette King**  
Minister of Health  
Minister for Food Safety 7. **Hon Jim Sutton**  
Minister of Agriculture  
Minister of Forestry  
Minister for Biosecurity  
Minister for Trade Negotiations Minister for Rural Affairs 8. **Hon Trevor Mallard**  
Minister of Education  
Minister of State Services  
Minister for Sport and Recreation Minister for the America's Cup  
Associate Minister of Finance  
Minister Responsible for the Education Review Office  
Adult and Community Education 9. **Hon Pete Hodgson**  
Minister of Energy  
Minister of Fisheries  
Minister of Research, Science and Technology  
Minister for Crown Research Institutes Associate Minister for Industry and Regional Development  
Associate Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade  
Convenor, Ministerial Group on Climate Change 10. **Hon Margaret Wilson**  
Attorney-General \[Includes responsibility for Serious Fraud Office]  
Minister of Labour  
Minister in Charge of Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations  
Minister for Courts Associate Minister of Justice 11. **Hon Parekura Horomia**  
Minister of Maori Affairs Associate Minister of Social Services and Employment (Employment)  
Associate Minister of Education  
Associate Minister of Fisheries  
Associate Minister of Forestry 12. **Hon Lianne Dalziel**  
Minister of Commerce  
Minister of Immigration  
Minister for Senior Citizens Associate Minister of Justice  
Minister Responsible for the Law Commission  
Associate Minister of Education (Special Education) 13. **Hon George Hawkins**  
Minister of Police  
Minister of Internal Affairs  
Minister of Civil Defence  
Minister of Veterans' Affairs 14. **Hon Mark Burton**  
Minister of Defence  
Minister for State Owned Enterprises \[Responsible for all SOEs except TVNZ Ltd]  
Minister of Tourism Deputy Leader of the House 15. **Hon Paul Swain**  
Minister of Transport  
Minister for Information Technology  
Minister of Communications Associate Minister of Finance  
Associate Minister of Revenue  
Associate Minister for Economic Development  
Minister for Small Business 16. **Hon Marian Hobbs**  
Minister for the Environment  
Minister for Disarmament and Arms Control Associate Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Official Development Assistance)  
Associate Minister for Biosecurity  
Associate Minister of Education  
Minister Responsible for the National Library  
Minister Responsible for Archives New Zealand  
Urban Affairs 17. **Hon Mark Gosche**  
Minister of Corrections  
Minister of Housing  
Minister of Pacific Island Affairs  
Minister for Racing 18. **Hon Ruth Dyson**  
Minister for ACC  
Minister of Women's Affairs  
Minister for Disability Issues Associate Minister of Social Services and Employment  
Associate Minister of Health 19. **Hon John Tamihere**  
Minister of Youth Affairs  
Minister of Statistics  
Minister for Land Information Associate Minister of Maori Affairs  
Associate Minister of Commerce  
Associate Minister for Small Business 20. **Hon Chris Carter**  
Minister of Conservation  
Minister of Local Government Minister for Ethnic Affairs

**Ministers outside of Cabinet**

21\. **Hon Judith Tizard**  
Minister of Consumer Affairs Associate Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage  
Associate Minister of Transport  
Associate Minister of Commerce  
Auckland Issues 22. **Hon Tariana Turia**  
Minister for the Community and Voluntary Sector Associate Minister of Maori Affairs (Social Development)  
Associate Minister of Health  
Associate Minister of Social Services and Employment (Social Services)  
Associate Minister of Housing 23. **Hon Rick Barker**  
Minister of Customs Associate Minister of Justice  
Associate Minister of Social Services and Employment 24. **Hon Dover Samuels**  
Minister of State Associate Minister of Tourism  
Associate Minister for Economic Development  
Associate Minister for Industry and Regional Development 25. **Hon Damien O'Connor**  
Minister of State Associate Minister of Agriculture  
Associate Minister for Rural Affairs  
Associate Minister for Racing  
Associate Minister of Immigration  
Associate Minister of Health 26. **Hon Harry Duynhoven**  
Minister of State Associate Minister of Energy  
Associate Minister of Transport (including Civil Aviation)

**PARLIAMENTARY UNDER-SECRETARIES**  
**Taito Phillip Field, MP**  
Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the

- Minister of Pacific Island Affairs  
  Minister of Justice  
  Minister of Social Services and Employment

**Mr Mita Ririnui, MP**  
Parliamentary Under Secretary to the

- Minister of Corrections  
  Minister of Conservation  
  Minister in Charge of Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations

1[Will]() become the responsibility for the Tertiary Education Commission when the Tertiary Education Reform Bill is passed. [*Back*](#SteveMaharey).