---
title: "Commerce Briefing to Incoming Minister"
date: 2002-08-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14760
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Commerce
---

The next three years will be an exciting time as the government progresses several pieces of Commerce-related legislation, which were first developed in the last term, Commerce Minister Lianne Dalziel said today.

The legislative programme for the Commerce portfolio is outlined in the Vote: Commerce Briefing papers from the Ministry of Economic Development to the Incoming Minister, which have been released today.

“My predecessor Paul Swain laid the foundation for much of our legislative agenda in Commerce and I am looking forward to overseeing the next phases of this work.

“There are a number of Bills already before Parliament including the Motor Vehicle Sales, Trade Marks, Securities Markets and Institutions and Constructions Contracts bills. As signalled in the Briefing, we will also be working on the Business Law Reform Bill.

“The Briefing highlights where our policy work will be concentrated over the next term. Those policy areas include:

·regulations required to implement the Securities Markets and Institutions Bill

·securities trading law

·substantial security holder interests

·copyright, patents and plant variety rights

·regulation of motor vehicle sales

·port companies’ market power

·the tariff review

·the review of the Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Agreement.

“The associate Commerce Ministers Judith Tizard and John Tamihere will also play crucial roles in overseeing legislation and policy relating to intellectual property and compliance costs respectively,” Lianne Dalziel said.