---
title: "Auckland’s regional development progress welcomed"
date: 2002-08-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14727
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Auckland’s progress in working in partnership on a regional economic development initiative is being welcomed by Economic Development Minister Jim Anderton.

“The highest priority for every region of New Zealand has been to get everyone within regions working in partnership and focused on their top priority for development.

“Auckland’s progress shows how important that process is. This is the first time that every local authority in Auckland has co-operated on a large-scale, regional economic development initiative.

“The hands-off days are over when the government would sit back and just hope that success would happen by itself. Now success is being planned for, and communities are working together – even regions as big as Auckland.

“The result of the government’s partnership with the Auckland region will be more jobs and rising incomes for Aucklanders,” Jim Anderton said.

“I have asked the Ministry of Economic development and Industry New Zealand to arrange an early meeting between and the Auckland Regional Development Strategy group at the earliest possible opportunity to further the partnership between central government and the Auckland region.

“I am making Auckland a priority for economic development in this term of office, after having concentrated on the provincial regions of New Zealand over the last two and a half years.”