---
title: "The Inland revenue Department's briefing papers to the incoming government."
date: 2002-08-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14755
ministers:
  - Michael Cullen
portfolios:
  - Revenue
---

BRIEFING FOR INCOMING MINISTER OF REVENUE

AUGUST 2002

STRUCTURE OF THE BRIEFING

TABLE OF CONTENTS  
COMMISSIONER’S OVERVIEW5  
Role of the Minister of Revenue6  
How we can assist you in your role as Minister and as a Member of Parliament7  
Immediate Issues8  
To Conclude9  
OVERVIEW OF TAX POLICY.10  
Policy project management11  
The importance of good tax policy12  
The policy development process13  
The tax policy work programme14  
The 1999 – 2002 tax policy work programme15  
The New Zealand tax system15  
Key challenges in tax policy17  
The legislative programme19  
Other policy initiatives20  
OVERVIEW OF OUR ADMINISTRATION22  
Strategic Business Plan—The Way Forward23  
Our first Statement of Intent24  
What has been achieved25  
Current initiatives25  
Changes in how our people work with the community31  
OVERVIEW OF SOCIAL POLICY33  
Student loans34  
Family assistance35  
Child support37

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION39  
The Size And Shape Of Inland Revenue40  
Organisational Profile41  
Tax Administration47  
How We Administer Social Policy50  
Call Management59

COMMISSIONER’S OVERVIEW

Inland Revenue is critical to the effective functioning of the public sector because of its role of:

Policy Advisor  
Inland Revenue has a key role in tax policy, working with the Treasury in providing advice on all aspects of tax policy and in assisting you in the management of the Generic Tax Policy Process.

Revenue Collector  
We collect 80%of the Government’s revenue. It is critical to the fiscal position that this revenue is collected efficiently and effectively.

Customer Assistance Provider  
We have a significant level of contact with the public—6.6 million customer contacts including 5.5 million telephone calls answered last year. Managing this well is critical to good compliance and the integrity of the tax system. People need to be assured that we have high standards, as set out in our Code of Conduct and our Charter and they also need the opportunity to dispute our decisions or complain about the quality of our service. These services are available through our Complaints Management Service.

Employer  
We are a large public service organisation with 4,547 people in 22 sites. Being such a large organisation means that good performance by Inland Revenue is critical to the standing of the public service. We also have a significant responsibility to our people to ensure that we are a good employer and that includes giving clear direction about what is expected and providing strong leadership. Our Charter and our Code of Conduct have provided the clear direction required.

Debt Collector  
We are one of the largest debt collectors in New Zealand. At 1 July 2002 Inland Revenue had $1.894 billion total outstanding debt. This figure includes $358.5 million already under instalment arrangements. It is critical that this is managed in accordance with the law to maintain the Government’s fiscal position and that it is managed sensibly, efficiently and in accordance with good commercial practices.

Ensuring Compliance  
We are one of the largest organisations in New Zealand with a focus on ensuring compliance. In administering the range of taxes and duties including income tax, GST (excluding GST on imports) and gift duty, we take cases to the courts each year under the Crimes and Revenue Acts. It is critical that the laws we are responsible for are enforced in a fair and consistent manner and in accordance with obligations on Inland Revenue such as maintaining taxpayer secrecy. We are implementing our compliance model—which clearly sets out how we are striving to achieve improved compliance by taxpayers with the law—this is discussed further in the section on our administration.

IT business  
We are one of the largest information technology businesses in New Zealand, both in the use of technology and in encouraging people to interact with us electronically. It is therefore critical that Inland Revenue plays a significant role in the Government’s e-commerce and e-government strategies.

Deliverer of Social Policy  
Inland Revenue has a significant social policy role. We distribute family assistance, child support and paid parental leave (on behalf of the Department of Labour) and collect child support payments. Any changes to the legislation or policies affecting our social policy programmes can have fundamental impacts on our ability to successfully deliver them. The income-contingent nature of the student loans, family assistance and paid parental leave schemes requires a significant interface with the systems used to administer the tax regime, and therefore any changes need to be embedded into that system. It is vital that Inland Revenue is involved early in the formulation of any policy relating to our social policy work.

Collector of Student Loans  
We administer the Student Loan Scheme jointly with the Ministry of Social Development and the Ministry of Education. Our role is to collect the loan repayments. Student loans are a large (and growing) government asset. Sound management of this programme is critical to the government’s balance sheet. At $4.559 billion it represents 36.14% of the Government’s net assets , and 6.36% of Government’s gross assets. The percentage of overdue student loan debt is also increasing but is still low at only 1.65% of the total student loan balance.

Role of the Minister of Revenue

Unlike the Minister of Finance, there is no statutory role for the Minister of Revenue. It is instead established by protocols between Ministers in the finance area.

On the basis of past experience, we would expect that in managing issues you need to focus on:

·Your management of tax policy issues—this is through the management of the tax policy work programme.  
·Your management of other issues—this is through normal public service mechanisms. These are: purchase agreement, statement of intent, quarterly reports and annual report.

The legislation rests responsibility for determining taxpayer-specific affairs with the Commissioner of Inland Revenue. Responsibility for protecting the integrity of the tax system falls to both officials and any Minister having responsibility under the Tax Administration Act 1994. Section 6(1) of this Act states:

Every Minister and every officer of any government agency having responsibilities under this Act… are at all times to use their best endeavours to protect the integrity of the tax system.

The Act goes on to define the integrity of the tax system under section 6(2) as:

Without limiting its meaning, ‘the integrity of the tax system’ includes---  
(a) Taxpayer perceptions of that integrity; and  
(b) The rights of taxpayers to have their liability determined fairly, impartially, and  
according to law; and  
(c) The rights of taxpayers to have their individual affairs kept confidential and treated  
with no greater or lesser favour than the tax affairs of other taxpayers; and  
(d) The responsibilities of taxpayers to comply with the law; and  
(e) The responsibilities of those administering the law to maintain the confidentiality of  
the affairs of taxpayers; and  
(f) The responsibilities of those administering the law to do so fairly, impartially, and  
according to law.

How we can assist you in your role as Minister and as a Member of Parliament

In addition to providing you with policy advice on the design of the tax system and providing revenue forecasting information, we can also assist on some other issues.

Staffing for Your Office

We can provide you with suitable people to act as an interface between the Department and Ministers. Over the last three years we have provided two tax policy analysts in the Office of the Minister of Finance and Revenue, a part-time tax policy analyst in the Office of the Associate Minister of Revenue and another part-time tax policy analyst in the Office of the Parliamentary Under-Secretary to the Minister of Revenue. As well as assisting with the large volume of tax specific queries Ministers’ offices receive, these people play a valuable coordination and advisory role for Ministers. At an early opportunity we need to discuss the Government’s requirements for the staffing of offices.

Responses to Ministerials and Parliamentary Questions

As Minister of Revenue you can expect to receive taxpayer-specific queries and complaints. We have a ministerial services unit based within our Policy Advice Division that coordinates the prompt drafting of responses for you (and other Ministers associated with the Revenue portfolio) to correspondence and parliamentary questions.

Enquiries from other Members of the Parliament and Constituents

There will also be occasions when you and other Members of Parliament may wish to contact us on behalf of a constituent, or advise a constituent on the best way of contacting Inland Revenue. To assist with this process we are producing and sending to all Members of Parliament a guide — Contacting Inland Revenue.

The Tax Affairs of Members of Parliament – our Special Files Unit

Inland Revenue recognises that High Court judges, Members of Parliament, and its own staff face the additional responsibility of upholding the taxation law that we either establish or administer. To assist this group of people, we offer a centralised account management service for Members’ of Parliament taxation affairs. The Special Files Unit, is located in Wellington and brings together the full range of Inland Revenue services for this customer group in one site. Use of this service is optional for Members of Parliament but is a requirement for the people who work for Inland Revenue and High Court judges. We will be writing to all Members of Parliament shortly to ensure they are aware of this service.

Reports and Briefings

We will provide you with a number of regular briefings and reports to assist you—the timing and scope of these will be set to meet your requirements.

·briefing s – I suggest that we discuss the type and frequency of our briefings with you in the near future.  
·monthly status reports — I will provide you with a monthly report on management and other issues affecting the department.  
·tax policy work programme updates — We will update you weekly on management of the tax policy work programme.

Immediate Issues

The immediate issues we consider you need to address as Minister are:

·agreeing protocols with other Ministers in the Finance and Revenue portfolios concerning the role of the Minister of Revenue  
·agreeing a revenue strategy and tax policy work programme—the Treasury and our Inland Revenue’s Policy Advice Division will report to you on this in the next few weeks  
·establishing the staffing arrangements for your office  
·progressing the policies in the two tax bills currently in the House  
·discussing with me the key challenges facing Inland Revenue and its strategic direction.

To Conclude

Inland Revenue is a large organisation with a significant role in ensuring that the Government has the revenue for its priorities and is provided with policy advice. It also has an important role in administering a number of government social policy schemes. To carry out these roles we have to build relationships with the community.

Last year we produced our strategic business plan, The Way Forward. This set out our desired future:

·taxpayers and other customers meet their obligations of their own accord—and Inland Revenue makes this easy  
·increasingly, the community regards paying tax as contributing to society  
·Inland Revenue is visible in the community, getting along side taxpayers  
·the community regards Inland Revenue as professional, approachable, effective, and efficient.

Our desired future reflects the way we view the business of tax administration and the social policy work we undertake. The key to achieving this future is maintaining community confidence in the way we administer the tax system and our social policy work.

The attached briefing expand on the policy and operational issues we have in performing our role and some additional information provides more detail on functional issues.

I look forward to discussing the issues raised in this briefing with you in the near future.

David Butler  
Commissioner of Inland Revenue

OVERVIEW OF TAX POLICY

Inland Revenue’s Policy Advice Division, jointly with the Treasury, advises the Government on all aspects of tax policy and social policy measures that interact with the tax system. Its other roles include:

·forecasting tax revenues  
·drafting tax legislation  
·negotiating and maintaining New Zealand’s network of double tax agreements with other countries  
·providing ministerial services.

The Policy Advice Division has a relatively small staff. It includes about 40 policy analysts directly responsible for the management and delivery of the tax policy work programme.

The Policy Advice Division aims to be the best possible professional strategic manager and communicator of tax policy and related social policy projects. We achieve this by good management of all aspects of the Generic Tax Policy Process, managing policy projects through from initial identification of issues to final implementation and review.

Policy project management

The stages of our project management are:

1.Identifying issues in tax and related social policy areas through our linkages and communication with:

·our Minister(s)  
·the taxation profession  
·the private sector  
·other parts of Inland Revenue  
·other government departments such as the Treasury, Ministry of Economic Development and Ministry of Social Development.

2.Developing those issues into policy proposals, taking into account how this will be managed through to implementation and review. This involves early identification of potential problems and options and how these might be handled.

3.Managing the consultation process in accordance with the Generic Tax Policy Process.

4.Supporting the process through to Ministerial and Cabinet stages.

5.Supporting the process through the legislative phase from drafting through to the House, select committees and enactment.

6.Implementation and review of the policy.

No policy project is a success until it is successfully implemented and operating. This requires Inland Revenue to provide appropriate information on the new rules to taxpayers and their advisors and Inland Revenue staff. It also requires the new rules to be integrated into existing operational systems by way of form design and necessary changes to the computer system. These issues need to be considered throughout policy development and carried through after legislation is enacted. This means that the Policy Advice Division needs to work closely with all areas of Inland Revenue, and there must be adequate time for operational requirements to be met.

An example of a project requiring this coordination are the new, fairer and more consistent debt and hardship rules determining how Inland Revenue should treat taxpayers who are in financial difficulty and cannot immediately meet their tax obligations. A bill introducing the new rules is still before Parliament, awaiting its second reading. It provides for an application date of 1 July 2002, but this will need to be deferred to later in the year to allow for the six or more weeks necessary to implement the final stages of the relevant system and process changes.

After a new policy has been implemented and has been operating for a period, it is desirable to review it to identify and correct problems that have emerged in practice. An example of such a review is the progressive, post-implementation review of GST, which resulted in an initial discussion document in 1999, with ensuing legislation in 2000, and a second discussion document last year. The previous Government also announced its intention to begin a post-implementation review of the taxation of fringe benefits later this year.

The importance of good tax policy

Tax policy necessarily involves complex technical issues. In providing advice on such matters we analyse the technical arguments and communicate the policy consequences of the options. What can appear to be issues of a quite technical nature often have significant implications for:

·the Government’s overall fiscal position  
·businesses and other taxpayers  
·overall government policy, by altering the incentives to work, save or invest in one activity over another.

About 85 % of total government revenue comes from income tax and GST. Both taxes are levied on a broad base, meaning that they affect most things that happen in the economy. One consequence of this is that tax policy issues arise across the broad spectrum of government activity and policy. For example, over the past few years tax policy has had an involvement with about 29 policy areas.

Tax policy in wider government activities  
·Accident compensation reform – Inland Revenue's role as a collector of premia·Agriculture – producer board reform·America’s Cup – taxation of yacht crews·Art and culture – taxation of films·Business – tax compliance cost reduction·Defence – taxation of personnel on active service outside New Zealand·Economic policy – the role of tax in promoting growth and innovation, taxation of savings and protecting the fiscal position·Education – student loans and taxation of school trustees·Electronic commerce – Electronic Transactions Bill·Environment – carbon charge and environmental taxes·Foreign Affairs – OECD work on Pacific Island tax havens, double tax agreements·Gambling – review of gambling taxes·Health – taxation of hospital boards·Immigration – relationship between immigration status and tax residence·Justice – Bill of Rights and human rights issues·Labour – Paid Parental Leave·Local government – taxation of local authority trading enterprises and GST treatment of rates·Mäori policy – Mäori authorities review·Racing – amortisation rates for stallions and broodmares, Racing Bill·Science and research – deductibility of research and development costs·Social policy – Child Support, Family Tax Credit, Paid Parental Leave and taxation of charities·Statistics – use of IRD income and GST data·Sport – taxation of amateur and professional sports·State-owned enterprises – tax status of SOEs·Telecommunications – GST rules·Tourism – GST treatment of tourists·Transport – taxation aspects of shipping review, taxation of toll roads·Treaty of Waitangi – tax treatment of Treaty settlements·Women’s Affairs – deductibility of child care expenses

The importance of tax issues and the potential impact of tax on a wide area of government policy means that it is especially important for tax policy to be well managed.

The policy development process

Since 1995 tax policy has been developed in accordance with the Generic Tax Policy Process. This is a process designed to ensure better, more effective tax policy development through early consideration of key policy elements and trade-offs of proposals, such as their revenue impact, compliance and administrative costs, and economic and social objectives. Another key feature of the process is that it builds external consultation and feedback into the policy development process, providing opportunities for public comment at several stages.

Consultation throughout the process contributes to greater transparency of policy-making, allowing the government to set out the policy objectives of proposals and the trade-offs it has made in developing them. Therefore it helps the private sector to understand the rationale behind government policy proposals.

Major tax initiatives are now subject to much greater public scrutiny at key stages in their development—from broad proposal through to post-implementation review. As a result, we now have more opportunity to develop workable options for reform by drawing upon information provided to us by the private sector early in the process.

The increased opportunity for consulting on tax policy has resulted in increasing numbers of individuals and organisations making submissions on proposals, whether set out in a discussion document or introduced in a taxation bill. Submissions are becoming increasingly technical, lengthy and detailed, which in turn makes the process lengthier and requires greater policy and parliamentary resources.

The tax policy work programme

One of the first steps for the new Government in relation to the Generic Tax Policy Process is to develop a three-year revenue strategy that is effectively linked with the Government’s economic strategy. It sets out the Government’s tax policy objectives. The next stage is the development of a rolling three-year tax policy work programme that gives effect to the revenue strategy.

Developing the three-year work programme involves scoping broad policy proposals and prioritising and sequencing the development of initiatives. We also look at budgeted resource requirements to develop the initiatives, the time needed to develop, legislate for and implement them, and modes of consultation and communication to be employed throughout the process.

This stage of the Generic Tax Policy Process culminates in a joint report by Inland Revenue’s Policy Advice Division and the Treasury to the Treasury Ministers and Minister of Revenue that outlines a policy work programme proposed by officials. Once approved, that joint work programme becomes a detailed tax policy purchase agreement between the Government and the two Departments.

When it is made public, as it usually is, the work programme is received with much interest by the tax and business communities, to whom it provides certainty and an understanding of the Government’s direction in tax policy.

As time passes, it is inevitable that policy initiatives not considered when the work programme was developed will need to be added to it, and there will be more items on the programme than can be progressed during the three-year period. There is a danger, however, that initiatives will be added without reviewing priorities. This places a major strain on finite tax policy resources and parliamentary resources, and results in slower progress for some existing priorities. It is important that when items are added to the work programme, existing priorities are reviewed to ensure that the Government’s expectations across the work programme are met.

The management of the work programme will be a key issue for both Ministers and officials in ensuring that priorities are delivered as agreed.

The 1999 – 2002 tax policy work programme

Following the implementation of Labour’s pledge commitment to increasing the top marginal tax rate, the main themes of the 1999 – 2002 tax policy work programme were:

·New Zealand in a world economy. This covers, for example, expanding our network of double tax agreements with other countries, extending the New Zealand and Australian imputation systems to relieve double taxation of companies operating in both countries, and considering issues relating to the taxation of inbound and outbound investment.  
·The coherent taxation of savings and the entities through which people invest and save. Gathered under this theme, for example, are initiatives such as reviewing the application of GST to financial services and introducing a progressive tax for employment-based superannuation.  
·Tax simplification and reduction of tax compliance costs. Recent examples include looking at ways to reduce compliance costs for small to medium-sized businesses, modernising the taxation of organisations that manage Mäori assets held in communal ownership and rewriting the Income Tax Act.  
·Protecting the revenue base. This includes, for example, closing loopholes as they are identified and considering legislation to counter mass-marketed tax schemes.

The New Zealand tax system

In the tax policy area, the last government put considerable resources into the Tax Review 2001, chaired by Robert McLeod. The main conclusion of that review was that the basic features of our current tax system are sound, a conclusion with which we agree.

Fundamental Features of the Tax System:  
·Reliance for most of our tax revenue on a broadly based income tax and consumption tax (GST). The Government relies on these taxes for about 85% of its revenue. Both tax bases have relatively few concessions by international standards. This enables them to collect relatively high levels of revenue at relatively low tax rates.  
·An income tax that is moderately progressive in nature. As the Tax Review noted, our income tax rate structure is never likely to be really effective at redistributing income between different New Zealanders. That is because there are few high-income earners, and lower-income earners tend to be on welfare benefits that are set in after-tax terms. The bulk of income tax revenue is collected from the group of middle-income earners. Thus any income redistribution objective is more effectively met through government expenditure.  
·A company tax system based on imputation. The imputation system, introduced in 1988, provides shareholders with a credit for tax paid at the company level, which offsets tax on dividends. This reduces the cost of new equity raising needed by expanding companies and ensures that companies are not penalised relative to other forms of commercial organisation.

Features of our tax system that seem to vary most from those of similar overseas countries:  
·Our lack of a threshold level of income before tax is payable. We achieve a similar result in net terms through the family tax credit mechanism. The difference between our threshold and those of other countries is that ours is targeted at low-income families and does not, for example, apply to the children of high-income families. This is why a one-income family with three children under 13 pays no net tax until parental income exceeds $30,435.  
·Our lack of a capital gains tax. The Tax Review 2001 investigated this issue and concluded that such a tax would collect relatively low levels of revenue at a substantial economic and compliance cost.  
·Our relative lack of special incentives and exemptions in our income tax and GST bases, such as tax incentives or exemptions for retirement savings. This has allowed us to raise a relatively high level of tax revenue at what are, in international terms, moderate marginal rates.

This is not to suggest that the tax system is perfect. It can be improved, which needs to be the focus of the next tax policy work programme.

Key challenges in tax policy

A new work programme

A big challenge in constructing the next work programme will be balancing competing demands for the resources of Ministers, Parliament, officials and the private sector. The Generic Tax Policy Process has, in our view, been a success in producing better quality tax policy, although it has led to an ever increasing requirement for consultation and information. Major tax policy initiatives can now require consultation, an issues paper or discussion document, further consultation, a business compliance cost study, a regulatory impact statement, a bill commentary and the release of a lengthy (often 100 or so pages long) officials’ report on submissions on a bill to Parliament’s Finance and Expenditure Committee. This is a very resource-intensive process to which further requirements are continuously being added.

Setting priorities

There is also a need to balance the resource requirements of maintaining the revenue base and the Government’s main tax policy initiatives against initiatives of non-Finance/Revenue Ministers in, for example, the areas of social policy or sectoral assistance, which can have substantial tax implications. It is also necessary to provide room in the work programme to meet private sector concerns where tax legislation is identified as causing unintended practical problems. Finally, there is an increasing demand for tax policy resources to be allocated to international tax matters such as the OECD and trans-Tasman tax matters. This reflects the increasing extent to which New Zealand needs to take into account international tax trends in setting its domestic rules.

Given the breadth of government policy areas that have tax implications, the complexity of tax issues and the limited resources available to deal with them, it is essential for Ministers to discuss and set out their tax policy priorities. Since many areas of government raise important tax policy issues, the allocation of tax policy resources is likely to affect the Government’s ability to pursue non-tax policy objectives. This is especially the case in areas of economic development and social policy. It is therefore desirable for Ministers in those areas to be clear about the implications of the tax policy work programme for policy development in their areas.

Budgetary fiscal rules

The tax policy work programme can also be affected by any budgetary fiscal rules the government decides to adopt. There is a need to ensure that any fiscal discipline on expenditure also applies in an equal way to initiatives that would reduce tax revenue. Otherwise there is an incentive for expenditure initiatives to be packaged as tax initiatives.

On the other hand, if tax initiatives reducing revenue must always be balanced by initiatives increasing revenue, this can force the Government to adopt a tax policy work programme that unintentionally places too heavy a tax burden on the economy. The ability to trade off the costs and benefits of law changes against changes in compliance and enforcement as alternative means of maintaining revenue bases also needs to be accommodated within the fiscal rules. The tax policy implications of any fiscal rule proposals, therefore, need to be considered before such rules are adopted.

Tax concessions

There has been an increasing trend by those looking to reduce impediments to the growth of priority economic sectors to seek sectoral tax reductions or concessions. This adds to the strain on tax policy resources and could undermine the broad tax bases our tax system and moderate rates rely upon. Inevitably, because tax collects a proportion of any businesses profits, it is an impediment to the development of all sectors of our economy. That, however, is the inevitable cost of raising revenue to meet government expenditure commitments. Sector-specific concessions will increase the impediments faced by other sectors and therefore need a high level of justification.

Tax simplification and compliance cost reduction

Tax simplification and business compliance cost reduction is another area where there is strong demand for change. The need to raise revenue at low overall cost places limits on the amount of simplification possible, although we consider there is still room for progress. Tax simplification tends to be an incremental process as there is no big, single solution that suits all taxpayers or businesses. Moreover, there are limits on simplification, as a revenue loss is usually involved, and taxpayers often want more accurate, tax calculations, even if they are more complex. A problem for New Zealand in achieving substantial compliance cost reductions is that relative to similar countries overseas, our tax system is already reasonably simple. Much simplification work overseas involves mitigating or removing complexities which do not exist in our system.

Officials’ current focus is on reducing compliance costs for small business. Small businesses form a large group, 85% of New Zealand enterprises having fewer than five employees. Each small business faces similar compliance obligations as those of much larger businesses, making their costs high relative to the tax they pay. There is a concern that these compliance costs may be hindering small business growth at critical stages in their development. This can only be to the detriment of New Zealand’s economic development. We are therefore reviewing policy and processes that impose compliance costs and developing a continuing programme for their reduction. Not all compliance costs arise because of legislative requirements— taxpayers may also be incurring unnecessary business costs because of the way Inland Revenue operates. Therefore simplification requires review of both the policy and operational aspects of the tax system.

International tax issues

Tax policy over the next few years will also need to focus increasingly on international tax matters. The world is becoming more integrated and tax systems more affected by overseas developments. Both capital and labour are becoming more mobile and more sensitive to tax. This makes it necessary to consider the international tax issues raised by the Tax Review 2001 and to monitor our company tax base, which is the most susceptible to threat from international competition. An increasing focus is also needed on trans-Tasman tax issues and developments in liaison with Australia. The growth of electronic commerce also poses risks and opportunities that we need to meet, such as through GST reverse charging.

Taxation of savings

A final challenge in the tax policy area will be to settle the debate on the future tax treatment of the savings of individuals. On one hand, our tax impost on savings is relatively high by international standards (because of the lack of concessions). On the other hand, it is the very lack of savings tax concessions that allows us to retain moderate tax rates. There is no easy way to reduce our tax on savings without a substantial increase in tax rates applying elsewhere.

The legislative programme

A heavy tax legislation programme awaits Parliament when it reconvenes. One of the two taxation bills carried over from the previous Parliament has as its main feature the comprehensive reform of the taxation of organisations that manage communally owned Mäori assets; that bill is awaiting select committee consideration. The main feature of the other is the introduction of new rules for the administration of tax debt. The bill has been reported back and is awaiting its second reading. We see the passage of this second bill as a particular priority, given the wide impact of the new debt and hardship rules, which were originally proposed to apply from July 2002.

As well, a bill containing the rewrite of the Income Tax Act, to make tax law easier to understand and apply, was scheduled to be introduced this year. Although this bill is not intended to incorporate policy changes of significance, it will probably be the largest bill ever to be introduced and inevitably covers complex technical issues.

The Responsible Gambling Bill is before the Government Administration Committee. The Bill is concerned with the regulatory environment for the gaming industry but also introduces a problem gambling levy that Inland Revenue would collect. Final decisions on other tax matters related to gambling are still to be made.

The 2002 legislative programme also included the provision of drafting instructions to the Parliamentary Counsel Office for a Child Support Amendment Bill to be introduced next year.

We have the resources to draft and progress two taxation bills a year, provided they do not overlap at two highly resource-intensive stages: when a bill is being drafted and its accompanying commentary being prepared for publication, and when officials are preparing their report on submissions on a bill that is before a select committee.

Other policy initiatives

As well as progressing legislation still before Parliament, the previous Government had announced tax reform proposals in a number of areas. These will need to be reviewed or advanced. These reform proposals (and their current status) are:

1.GST on Imported Services. A discussion document was released in June 2001. The Government announced in March 2002 that further action would be deferred until the issues could be considered in tandem with those in a forthcoming discussion document, GST and financial services.

2.Tax Review 2001. It was announced in the 2002 Budget that the Government would consider implementing the Tax Review’s recommendations on changes to the foreign investment fund tax rules and the taxation of migrants, and would release for discussion officials’ analysis behind their advice that tax rates for non-resident investors should not be lowered.

3.Mass-marketed Tax Schemes. An officials’ issues paper published in January suggested legislative changes to defer tax deductions on schemes seen as undermining the tax base and would require their registration. Consultation has continued.

4.Trans-Tasman Triangular Tax. In March the Australian and New Zealand Governments issued a jointly prepared discussion document outlining proposals to relieve the double taxation of investments in Australian and New Zealand companies that operate in both countries. Consultation has taken place here and in Australia.

5.Charities. A discussion document on tax and charities was released in June 2001. It led to the establishment of a working party in November that issued its first report in March 2002 and a second report in May 2002. Legislation related to the first report, an increased maximum rebate for donations and extension of the corporate tax deduction, is in a bill before Parliament. The Government announced that a charities commission would be established to approve and register organisations seeking charitable status for tax purposes.

6.Tax and Privilege. A discussion document narrowing the ambit of legal privilege for documents prepared by lawyers but widening privilege to tax advice produced by non-lawyers was released in May 2002. Submissions are being received and considered.

7.Post-implementation Review of Fringe Benefit Tax. Ministers stated that a review of the fringe benefit tax rules would begin this year.

8.Review of Specified Superannuation Contribution Withholding Tax. With Ministerial approval, consultations have taken place on how the withholding tax on employer superannuation schemes can be aligned with the tax rate of employees for whom those contributions are paid.

9.Review of the compliance and penalty legislation. A review of the relatively new compliance and penalty legislation, which was introduced in 1997, began in October 1999. The review has continued, with the release in August 2001 of a discussion document on proposed changes that were included in the two taxation bills that are still before Parliament. Planning for the next stage of the review is under way. It is expected to consider how taxpayer behaviour has changed as a result of the new rules; examine whether the rules encourage voluntary compliance; and compare New Zealand’s rules, including the extent of non-compliance and the scale of penalties, with those of other countries.

OVERVIEW OF OUR ADMINISTRATION

Our operational decisions have to be based around our core obligations of raising revenue, managing debt and enforcing the laws in a way that enhances compliance with law, the integrity of the tax system and the integrity of the public service. They also need to reflect community expectations and our role as both a tax and social policy administrator.

Our ability to easily carry out our obligations can be affected by the level of community confidence in Inland Revenue. This fell during the late 1990s. Since then we have been rebuilding that confidence by improving our service levels, articulating how we work with the community and delivering customer focused training to all our people. Over the past year we have implemented a number of initiatives that will help us to continue that process.

Strategic Business Plan—The Way Forward

Our strategic business plan, The Way Forward clearly articulates the nature of our desired future and our strategic direction.

In implementing the business plan we are focusing on how we go about our work and making it easier for taxpayers to meet their obligations rather than making structural changes to the Department.

A key outcome of our business plan is implementing a compliance model, which was developed initially by the Australian Taxation Office. The model promotes a more tailored, responsive approach to taxpayers and recognises the external factors that influence taxpayer compliance attitudes and behaviours.

Our first Statement of Intent

This year we developed our first Statement of Intent. In this we stated what we are striving to achieve for the Government and the community in tax policy, tax administration and social policy.

The Statement of Intent also saw the development of some new performance measures that are focused on what we are striving to achieve, not just on the volumes and quantities of our outputs. More outcome-focused performance measures will be developed this year.

What has been achieved

Developing these documents has provided an organisational framework from which initiatives are being developed and implemented that aid in achieving our desired future and outcomes. Some things have already been achieved.

Achievements

·Improvements in customer service – This year has marked our best performance in our call centres with significant improvements in performance measures with corresponding reductions in call waiting times. These improvements and others across the organisation has seen customer satisfaction with the department remaining at a high level throughout the year .

·Improvements in relationships by identifying and working with key customer groups – For example our work with: Corporates (taxpayers with turnover greater than $100 million), the tax profession, and social policy customers through the social policy liaison officers.

·Additional resources were received from Government in 2001/02 for increased audit activities and further development of our ability to deliver services. This has seen revenue assessed for the year, well ahead of the forecast $679 million, at $926 million, with $170 million (forecast $120 million) of this in the harder areas to assess of aggressive tax issues and tax evasion.

Current initiatives

The most effective and efficient way of collecting revenue is if members of the community voluntarily comply with their obligations. To achieve this we need to manage our relationships and make it easier for people to meet their obligations. We also need to better understand the people we interact with and how they do their business.

Improving compliance through developing relationships

We are also developing closer relationships with other important groups such as tax agents, employers and other intermediaries to better understand their concerns and refine internal processes. These groups are important both as agents for revenue raising and for the influence their perceptions and values have on the wider community’s perception of the tax system. Working with these groups will have the benefit of making the groups’ role in the collection of tax and other money easier.

As part of this initiative we are expanding our Agent Account Managers in 2002, and working with tax agents to ensure that they are well-positioned to provide their small business clients with comprehensive services across all revenues.

Mäori are an important group of taxpayers, who we need to reach to increase their access to both tax and social policy services. We need to ensure that Mäori needs are understood and addressed and therefore how our responses can be tailored accordingly. During 2002/03, we will be talking to our people to determine what new initiatives we can put in place to better meet our responsibilities under the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi.

Making it easier to comply

To encourage voluntary compliance we need to find ways of making it easier for taxpayers to meet their obligations. Many taxpayers and other customers find it easier to comply with the law electronically. Our new e-enablement strategy will improve taxpayer and social policy recipients access to the Department though electronic means, especially via the internet. We have improved the range of information available on our website, and provided a range of forms that can be completed online and sent electronically. Our e-enablement strategy, setting out the Department’s electronic activities priorities for the next five years will be launched in early September 2002.

We also make a significant contribution to wider e-government strategies such as the government portal (allowing easy access to people searching for government information and wanting to conduct transactions electronically).

Reducing compliance costs

Small businesses are an important component of the New Zealand economy and are one of the largest taxpayer groups. Therefore there are significant economic advantages to be gained from simplification initiatives. As outlined previously in the policy section, we have been considering changes in both how Inland Revenue operates and policy that could be implemented to reduce compliance costs.

Reducing taxpayer debt

Total outstanding debt at 30 June 2002 is $1.894 billion , this has increased over the past year from $1.781 billion. The main contributors to the increase include:

·the increase in total revenue assessed— tax debt is 3.9% of revenue collected, tax debt has steadily increased from 2.7% in 1995/96 to current levels, however, in 1992/93 it stood at 4.6% .  
·growth in GST debt in the business, finance and service sectors—while overall GST revenue has been increasing  
·increase in student loan debt from 0.64% in 1996 to 1.65% of the student loan balance in June 2002 and increase in family assistance debt from $183 million in 2001 to $205 million in 2002.  
·the impacts of the compliance and penalties legislation in 1997 which now sees 44.5% of Inland Revenue debt attributable to penalties and interest  
·continued improvement in methods of tracking and identifying debt available for collection, especially within our Corporates section, therefore resulting in an increase in collectable debt.

Strategies to reduce the debt include:

·building new approaches such as proactive actions to prevent debt arising  
·continuing to focus on clearing older and higher value debt  
·increasing the amount of debt being recovered through instalment arrangements  
·making incoming debt calls a priority  
·examining easier payment options for student loans.

Maintaining the integrity of the tax system

If there is perception within the community, rightly or wrongly, that the tax system is compromised through avoidance or evasion or inconsistency of treatment, this would result in a major risk to our ability to collect the correct amount of revenue. Enforcing the law through the collection of unpaid revenue and debt, through audit activity to detect and deter non-compliance and, when appropriate, through litigation, is essential to the integrity of the tax system. But this must be done fairly, consistently and as transparently as allowed within the law.

As already mentioned one of the initiatives to maintain the integrity of the tax system is Industry Partnership. It has a desired outcome of a positive change in community perception regarding the declaration of all income from cash jobs. This is important as it:

·addresses public perceptions of fairness  
·is seen to level the playing field for businesses  
·ensures the integrity of the tax system is maintained.

To address the cash economy will require the community to behave differently and regard paying tax as contributing to society, one aspect of our desired future.

It is critical to maintaining the integrity of the tax system that our people operate with integrity. We have a high regard for the confidentiality of taxpayer information and the public’s right to be assured that any risks to that confidentiality are properly managed. This is reinforced in our Charter and in our Code of Conduct. To protect and maintain the confidentiality and privacy of taxpayer information, Inland Revenue monitors access to, and the use of, the information databases which hold confidential taxpayer information.

However, the secrecy requirements mean we are unable to respond to media criticism as to why decisions are made with regard to individual taxpayers as we can only comment about the general issues. This means an informed debate on the issues is often not possible. The result can be a public perception of events which may undermine confidence in the tax system and the wider public service.

Tax issues in dispute

Under the law taxpayers have the right to have their liability determined fairly, impartially and according to the law. One of the mechanisms the Commissioner uses to ensure that this is fulfilled is the our Adjudication and Rulings Division. As part of the disputes resolution process, this division provides an impartial “fresh look” at tax issues in disputes between taxpayers and the Department and is responsible for developing binding rulings and other formal statements interpreting the tax laws.

Trends in Adjudication and Rulings

Taxpayers are using these services for more complex tax arrangements. This, in turn, is impacting on the time taken to consider and rule on applications. In particular, the numbers of technical issues per case has risen over the last few years and now has no meaningful comparison to what was envisaged when the process was originally introduced.

The cost of the service to taxpayers is also increasing—the average cost per ruling more than doubled between 1999 and 2002, a reflection of the increased complexity and the length of time required to finalise cases. The average cost of a ruling is $12,684, with the highest amount paid for a ruling in the past two years being $115,010. Rulings do, however, lock in a significant amount of revenue for the Crown. Although the fee structure does act somewhat as a filter for those wanting to use the service, the current trend means significant numbers of small and medium businesses are effectively denied access to formally binding Inland Revenue rulings.

This area of work is difficult to resource as there is a high demand outside of the Department for the necessary skills.

Maintaining and building capability

To achieve our desired outcomes and create our desired future, we must have a strong focus on capability development.

People  
We must be able to continue to attract and retain talented people, continually develop staff and to focus all employees on achieving the desired future and organisational outcomes.

We also must maintain technically skilled people that are supported by processes designed to take advantage of their skills and knowledge as managers and leaders, and their understanding of compliance behaviour, complex legislation, information technology and community concerns.

To attract, grow and retain the right people, our areas of attention in short to medium term are:

·improve leadership capability  
·improve the level and quality of tax technical skills  
·further implement the new performance management and remuneration process.

Technology  
As part of developing the business plan, Inland Revenue identified the need to review its information technology infrastructure to ensure its sustainability over the longer term. This review will assess whether the Department’s technology environment will continue to meet current business needs and whether it has the capacity and capability to accommodate future requirements, including long term support of e-enablement initiatives. It is planned that Inland Revenue will have a technology strategy finalised by the end of the year.

Aiding wider public initiatives

Achieving our core obligations and our new initiatives requires us to collaborate across the public sector particularly with other agencies with which we share customers, for example, the Ministry of Social Development. We also have a significant role in wider Government initiatives including:

·Pathfinder — a project coordinated by the State Services Commission and the Treasury that assists departments to develop an outcome management framework  
·being on the Review of Centre steering committee and providing staff to work on various aspects of the it  
·providing a significant portion of the services for the government portal.

Changes in how our people work with the community

Transparency of our processes and the ability to question them is needed for the community and our people to have confidence in our administration of tax and social policy. We are providing strong leadership, with senior managers being more visible and giving clear direction about what is expected. Four initiatives were put in place in 2001 to support this, our Charter, Complaints Management Service, Climate Survey and our Code of Conduct.

Our Charter

Our Charter sets out Inland Revenue’s fundamental commitments concerning privacy and confidentiality, consistency and equity and the right of all taxpayers to question the Department. As part of this commitment all staff receive Focus on Service Delivery training. We are reporting on our Charter on an annual basis with the first commentary being included in the 2001/02 annual report.

Complaints Management Service

The Complaints Management Service allows taxpayers and other customers unsatisfied with the resolution of their complaint to request a fresh look. Trends and issues identified by the complaints process are referred to National Management to improve the level of service provided by the Department.

Climate survey

It is important to listen to our people as well as the public about how well we are achieving our objectives and where we need to improve. Last year we carried out our first climate survey since implementing our Charter, Complaints Management Service and developing The Way Forward.

Our people believed we had improved in:

·customer service and greater personal contact with the community  
·general tax issues such as tax simplification  
·strong support for the new Business Plan and the Commissioner’s visibility  
·technology  
·managing external communications.

Work is under way in the two priority areas identified in the results:

·increase staff confidence in Inland Revenue as an employer  
·increase commitment to an environment that promotes compliance and tailoring of our work to suit taxpayers’ varied circumstances.

Code of Conduct

To foster the right climate and culture we need to have a robust framework for exercising sound judgment and describing our expectations of ethical behaviour. The Code of Conduct provides this framework.

OVERVIEW OF SOCIAL POLICY

We collect child support and student loan payments and distribute family assistance, Paid Parental Leave (on behalf of the Department of Labour) and child support.

Social policy work is administered in a similar way to revenue collection but with some important differences in emphasis. Features include:

·A strong education and advice component, particularly an emphasis on raising awareness of eligibility for financial assistance or the nature of payment obligations. As in tax administration, building relationships with Child Support customers and student loan borrowers has a direct influence on their voluntary compliance.  
·Ensuring that it is easy to interact with Inland Revenue and to obtain the correct entitlement or make the right payments.  
·Recognising the different circumstances and needs of social policy customers, for example, the emotional circumstances of Child Support clients or the accessibility issues for low income families.  
·Social policy customers are often from a social policy perspective, only customers, for relatively short periods of time. For example, a person may be registered as a taxpayer for most or all of their life, whereas they may only be a family assistance recipient or child support recipient while their children are aged 18 or younger.

Inland Revenue does not have a direct relationship with some of its social policy clients. For example, families who receive an income-tested benefit through the Ministry of Social Development become aware of family support when they apply for a benefit. We do not have such a relationship with working families.

Unlike taxation, we are not the lead policy agency for most of our social policy programmes. But invariably, it is our systems, processes and customer interfaces that are most affected by these policies. Therefore any changes to the legislation or policies affecting our social policy programmes can have some fundamental impacts on our ability to successfully deliver on them. The income-contingent nature of the student loans and family assistance schemes requires a significant interface with the systems used to administer the tax regime and therefore any changes need to be embedded in that system. It is therefore vital that Inland Revenue is involved very early in any policy development relating to our social policy work.

Student loans

We administer the Student Loan Scheme jointly with the Ministry of Social Development and the Ministry of Education. Our role being to collect the loan repayments. The student loan balance is a significant government asset to manage. At $4.559 billion it represents 36.14% of the government’s net assets , therefore it needs to be well managed. It is also subject to much public comment and scrutiny. The student loan balance is continuing to grow as is the percentage of overdue debt.

Student loan debt

The total overdue debt level for student loans is still relatively low at 1.65% of total borrowings. Approximately 46% of the current overdue student loan debt is attributable to overseas borrowers.

In addition to having more resources focusing on the collection of overdue student loan debt, we are seeking to reduce the compliance costs in this area by making repayments easier and focusing on borrower education. The key is to ensure student loan borrowers understand their repayment obligations with a view to minimising the occurrence of new debt in the future.

Information to encourage borrowers to make voluntary repayments and repay their loan as quickly as possible is planned for early 2003. The promotion of the student loan calculator on our website will also form a supporting role in the campaign.

Student loan doubtful debt provision

The student loan doubtful debt provision is a significant cost to the Crown (10% of total student loan debt). The audit of the Student Loan Scheme Annual Report highlighted the need for an in depth review of the doubtful debt provision methodology. The completion of this review has resulted in an increase of the provision by 1.4% to 11.4%, subject to Audit New Zealand’s clearance. The impact of this will be recognised in the Crown Financial Statements to 30 June 2002.

Family assistance

Complexity of family assistance

Family assistance is complex to administer and for the public to apply for. Like many benefits, families need to be aware that they may be eligible for family assistance to be able to apply for it, although indicators suggest we are reaching most eligible working families. However, family assistance has a number of added complexities.

It is made up of four different components, grouped into two packages: Family Support and Family Plus—this has three components: Parental Tax Credit, Child Tax Credit, and Family Tax Credit . These components have various qualifying criteria, including each component having different income entry levels, which requires recipients to be able to accurately assess income levels. Overpayments, that are difficult for low income families to repay arise if families do not accurately assess their income or fail to advise of any changes in their circumstances.

Inland Revenue is working on a number of ways to ease the complexity of family assistance for recipients, including looking at simplifying the interface between families and the Department, and working more closely with the Ministry of Social Development, both at policy and operational levels.

Child support

Child support is slightly different from our other social policy functions in that we are the lead department in the development of policy advice as well as being involved operationally in its collection and distribution. It is also quite different from our other work in that we are also dealing, at least initially, with people at a difficult time emotionally due to a relationship breakdown. A significant number of the enquiries that constituents raise with Members of Parliament concern child support.

Child Support faces a number issues, mostly relating to improving the level of voluntary compliance. A number of external and internal factors contribute to the level of voluntary compliance.

Changing attitudes and behaviours and improving customer service

The use of research and various communication initiatives are important to understand more about customers and how to address their needs to help change attitudes and behaviour. Recent advertising campaigns and the role of Community Liaison Officers and Mobile Officers have been successful in helping to change some attitudes and customer behaviour towards child support.

Paternity

The paternity of a child for whom child support is claimed is assumed at the time an application is received and is usually supported by evidence on the child’s birth certificate. However, if a parent has been asked to pay child support but believes that they are not the birth parent of the child, they have the right to object. In this situation the paying parent needs to disprove their paternity.

There is an increased interest around the policy position under the Child Support Act of assuming paternity. Men’s groups in particular have strong views on this matter and are actively lobbying for a change in this policy setting. It is, however, considered that the current legislation is appropriate because issues relate to the clarification of policy and the interpretation of existing legislation, rather than identifying requirements of fundamental legislative changes.

Policy work programme

It is important to include on the tax policy work programme work to deal with child support penalties and other issues of importance to either paying or custodial parents. Many of these issues go to the issues of equity and community support of the child support system.

THE SIZE AND SHAPE OF INLAND REVENUE’S BUSINESS

Taxation

·forecast tax revenues for the 2001/02 year totalled $31.4 billion – total revenue has increased by 18% from 1998/99 (7% increase in indirect taxation, 21% increase in direct taxation)  
·forecast tax revenue for 2002/03 financial year—$32.7 billion  
·net cost of collecting $100 in tax revenue is declining—88 cents (forecast 2001/02) from $1.55 in 1991/92  
·individuals make up 86% of the registered taxpayer base  
·0.2% of the taxpayer base generated 49% of all tax revenue (2000 tax year) through the payment of GST, PAYE and other taxes  
·total outstanding debt as at June 2002 was $1.894 billion.

Inland Revenue’s social policy business

·160,659 active family assistance recipients (31/3/01)  
·$205 million – family assistance debt  
·216, 525 custodial Child Support customers  
·204,699 non-custodial Child Support customers  
·20,000 paid parental leave applications expected each year  
·360,612 student loan borrowers  
·the average amount owed per student loan borrower has increased from $5,525 in 1993/94 to $10,207 in 1997/98 to $12,643 in 2001/02  
·$4.6 billion – total student loan balance owing  
·1.65% – overdue student loan debt  
·78% of student loans are under $20,000.

Inland Revenue

·4,547 full-time equivalent people  
·22 sites in 17 centres  
·annual appropriation $431.431 M (incl GST)  
·Inland Revenue annually handles an average of:  
–7.3 million payments  
–7.2 million returns  
–6.6 million customer contacts including 5.5 million telephone calls  
–5.2 million taxing paying entities.

ORGANISATIONAL PROFILE

Inland Revenue  
currently employs 4,547 people, located in 22 sites in 17 centres.

Inland Revenue provides services to all New Zealanders through collecting the bulk of revenue needed by Government to finance its social and economic programmes. It also provides policy advice on the design of the tax system, revenue forecasting, collects child support, student loans, and distributes family assistance, child support and Paid Parental Leave.

Its annual appropriation for 2002/03 is $431,431 million including GST.

Commissioner’s role

The Chief Executive and Commissioner of Inland Revenue is responsible for:

·ensuring delivery of Inland Revenue’s agreed outputs in terms of the specification in the Purchase Agreement with the Vote Minister(s)  
·the effective and efficient collection of revenue for the Government  
·the promotion of compliance, especially voluntary compliance, by all taxpayers with the Inland Revenue Acts and ensuring that in collecting revenue there are not unnecessary compliance costs incurred by taxpayers  
·delivering various government social policy programmes.

The Commissioner of Inland Revenue performs two very integrated roles—as Chief Executive with responsibilities as defined by the State Sector Act 1988 and as Commissioner charged with the care and management of the taxes covered by the Inland Revenue Acts and other functions as may be conferred on the Commissioner . The Inland Revenue Acts confer substantial independence on the Commissioner in their administration and in applying the law prescribed, both generally and specifically. This ensures the Commissioner can exercise wholly independent judgments, such as binding rulings, on the tax affairs of individual taxpayers, which is vital for maintaining the integrity of the tax system.

The Chief Executive and Commissioner of Inland Revenue is David Butler. He joined Inland Revenue in February 2001 following 25 years experience in the Australian Taxation Office, most recently as First Assistant Commissioner where he was responsible for leading the implementation of extensive business tax reforms. David has a Bachelor of Laws degree and a Commerce (Accounting) Certificate. He is admitted as a barrister and solicitor in Australia and is a Fellow of the Australian Society of Certified Practicing Accountants. He has undertaken senior leadership development programmes in Business Schools in Australia, Canada and the UK.

Organisational structure

Policy Advice

The Policy Advice Division of Inland Revenue, jointly with the Treasury, advises you on all aspects of tax law and reform and on social policy measures that interact with the tax system. The division also drafts tax legislation, forecasts tax revenues, and negotiates, interprets and maintains New Zealand’s network of double tax agreements with other countries. In addition the division contains the Ministerial Services Unit and the Forecasting and Analysis Unit. The latter works with the Treasury in producing Crown revenue forecasts. It also forecasts and monitors Crown expenditure and revenue for our social policy programmes (such as family and child support) and it analyses tax and other data to quantify the impact of tax and social policy initiatives.

General Manager—Robin Oliver. Robin has an MA first class honours in Political Studies and an LLB from the University of Auckland. Robin worked initially for Treasury in a variety of areas and then in the private sector as a tax adviser. He worked with a number of accounting firms, being a partner in Arthur Andersen before joining Inland Revenue. Robin is a member of the International Fiscal Association, a member of the Advisory Board of the OECD’s Committee on Fiscal Affairs and a member of the International Monetary Fund’s panel of tax policy experts.

Business Development and Systems

The Business Development and Systems Division is concerned with the operation and ongoing improvement of the Department’s core business systems and annual planning and production cycles.

The Division is composed of the following units:

Operations Processing

Operations Processing is responsible for maintaining the majority of systems operated by Inland Revenue, high volume processing of returns, payments and general correspondence, managing Inland Revenue’s relationship with a number of external service providers, and operating system helpdesks for internal and external users. It has three processing centres in Hamilton, Upper Hutt and Christchurch.

Information Technology

Information Technology provides resources for the delivery of key Inland Revenue initiatives, supports Inland Revenue’s business processes through the provision of an information technology infrastructure, and assists Inland Revenue to make informed technology decisions to enhance operations.

Operations Services

Operations Services are a network of professional support groups throughout Inland Revenue that manage a wide range of shared services supporting Inland Revenue’s core business.

Design and Monitoring

The Design and Monitoring Group is responsible for the design and development of the Department’s products and services. It also monitors the Department’s performance against agreed outputs and outcomes.

General Manager—Colin MacDonald. Colin joined Inland Revenue in November 2001. Before joining Inland Revenue, Colin was the Chief Operating Officer for the ANZ Bank in New Zealand. He has an extensive background in senior leadership roles in national operations and information technology, in banking, the retail sector, the oil industry and in the legal profession. Colin holds a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science from Glasgow University and is a member of the British Computer Society as well as a Chartered Engineer.

Service Delivery

The Service Delivery Division provides the full range of customer services for Inland Revenue, including the administration of Inland Revenue’s tax and social policy functions.

Service Delivery is composed of four delivery channels:

·Field Delivery  
·Call Management  
·Child Support  
·Complaints Management Service.

Field Delivery

Field Delivery provides a variety of services to Inland Revenue customers, including public and client education, handling of enquiries, collection of outstanding debt and the audit of the tax affairs of individuals and businesses. Inland Revenue operates five service centres across New Zealand, located in Takapuna, Manukau, Hamilton, Wellington and Christchurch, with a further twelve branch offices located in provincial centres.

The Special Files Unit is located within field delivery. It is responsible for administering the revenue and other related legislation as it applies to the tax affairs of staff, their spouses (by election) and associated parties. Special Files also administers the tax affairs of taxpayers in authoritive positions such as Members of Parliament and High Court judges.

Call Management

Call Management is responsible for ensuring that the call centres operate to maximum capacity and efficiency by providing accurate call forecasting, planning and process functions. Call centres are located in Takapuna, Manukau, Hamilton, Wellington and Christchurch.

Child Support

Child Support is responsible for ensuring that children receive financial support from parents who no longer live with them. It is managed as a separate activity within Inland Revenue.

Complaints Management Service

Complaints Management is a centralised service for customers who wish to make a complaint about Inland Revenue. It provides a mechanism for Inland Revenue to identify trends and issues for process and quality improvement.

General Manager—Bruce Thompson. Before joining Inland Revenue in November 2001, Bruce held senior leadership roles in the Australian Taxation Office in areas of taxation, compliance, debt collection, strategic planning and most recently, large business and international. Bruce has a Bachelor of Commerce and has recently completed studies for a Masters of Business Administration.

Strategic Design

The Strategic Design Division provides specialist organisational development and management advice to the Commissioner and the Senior Management Team on the medium to long-term direction for Inland Revenue and the framework of corporate management policies, as well as managing Inland Revenue’s relationship with a variety of external stakeholders, including the State Services Commission and the Treasury.

Within Strategic Design, there are groups responsible for: the Department’s planning and reporting processes; identification and creation of business ideas; initiatives and concepts, the development of the high-level design for key strategic initiatives; development of organisational-wide policies, systems and processes in key areas such as HR and finance. Groups also provide specialist advice on areas including strategic and practical communications advice, corporate legal issues, research into customer compliance behaviour, and evaluation of the effectiveness of programmes and initiatives.

General Manager—Liz Sinclair. Liz joined Inland Revenue from the State Services Commission in 1987. She has been involved with business planning and organisational change projects. She became General Manager Strategic Services in 1995, which became Strategic Design in 2001. Liz has a first-class honours degree in history from Otago University.

Adjudication and Rulings

The function of the Adjudication and Rulings Division is to consider technically complex questions of tax interpretation, and formulate the Commissioner’s view on them. Under the Tax Administration Act 1994 the rights of taxpayers include having their liability determined fairly, impartially and according to the law. On behalf of the Commissioner, Adjudication and Rulings plays a role in ensuring that these rights are upheld.

The Adjudication Unit, as part of the disputes resolution process, provides an impartial fresh look at tax issues in disputes between taxpayers and the Department by ensuring that a high level of technical expertise outside the operational area is applied before a final assessment is issued in a disputed case.

The Rulings Unit is responsible for developing binding rulings and other formal statements for internal and external customers, and for developing and communicating the Department’s interpretation of the law arising from this process to customers and Inland Revenue’s staff.

General Manager—Martin Smith. Martin holds LLB (Hons) and LLM degrees from the University of Adelaide, a post-graduate Diploma in Financial Management from the University of New England, and the degree of Master of Taxation Studies (Hons) from Auckland University. He is admitted as a barrister and solicitor in Australia and New Zealand, and has lectured on tax matters at five universities in those two countries. He joined Inland Revenue in 1995.

Internal Audit

The role of the Internal Audit Directorate is to provide assurance to the Chief Executive and Audit and Risk Committee that risks are understood and managed appropriately in a dynamically changing environment and that accountabilities and responsibilities for administering tax and social policy systems are being met.

Litigation Management

Litigation Management is responsible for Court cases where a taxpayer disagrees with their assessment.

TAX ADMINISTRATION

The largest portion of Inland Revenue’s business is tax administration. We are the collector of 80% of government’s revenue.

There are over 5.2 million taxpayer entities registered with Inland Revenue.

78% of revenue in the last year came from individuals and GST.

With such a large number of customers it is important for the Department to identify where to place particular focus. One of these areas is Corporates. These are taxpaying entities with a turnover greater than $100 million. Although they only make up 0.2% of taxpayers they generate just under 50% of all revenue collected. This is because they pay PAYE tax on behalf of large numbers of employees, pay GST and company tax, etc.

Collectable debt has increased over the past two years from $972.1 million to $1.219 billion at 30 June 2002. In the past 10 years, collectable debt as a percentage of tax revenue has ranged from 4.6% in 1992/93 to 3.9% in 2001/02.

How Tax is Administered by Inland Revenue

Four of the Department’s output classes are primarily responsible for the administration of taxation.

Information services

This provides assistance to taxpayers through the five call centres, and five service centres and their offices on new and existing tax laws and systems. Between 6.9 million and 7.4 million telephone, personal and written contacts are expected to be made with customers in the 2002/03 year.

Revenue Assessment and Collection

This covers the issuing of tax assessments and refunds; processing of returns and banking tax payments through the three processing centres; and the collection of Crown revenue. Between 5.8 million and 6.4 million income tax returns, GST returns, FBT returns, rebate claim forms and employer monthly schedules are expected to be processed in the 2002/03 year.

Management of debt and outstanding returns

This covers follow-up action against non-compliers who fail to file a return or who do not pay on time. As at 30 June there is $1.894 billion of outstanding debt of which 18.9% is under instalment.

Taxpayer audit

This covers the auditing of all classes of taxpayers with emphasis on high-risk non-compliers and management of tax litigation. In 2002/03 it is expected that over one million hours will be dedicated to conducting audits, extended audits and investigations. Taxpayer audit is a significant component of the Department’s budget with a budget for 2002/03 of $96.6 million out of a total departmental appropriation of $431.431 million.  
HOW WE ADMINISTER SOCIAL POLICY

Child Support

The Child Support scheme was implemented in 1992. It is money paid by parents who are not living with their children to help support those children. The payments received from paying parents are either passed on to the person caring for the children or directly to the Crown when the custodial parent receives a social welfare benefit. Custodial parents who are beneficiaries are required by the terms of the Act to apply for child support (about 75% of our custodial parents are beneficiaries). Other custodial parents may voluntarily choose to have Inland Revenue administer their entitlement.

How is child support assessed?  
The amount of child support a paying parent is required to pay is assessed annually using a formula, which takes into account the number of children to be supported, the paying parent's income and living expenses. The formula also takes into account the paying parent’s current situation, for example, if they live with a new partner and/or children.

The maximum income that payments can be assessed on is 2.5 times the average wage, this and the minimum weekly payment are inflation adjusted annually.

The child support formula assessment is: (a – b) x c where:  
a is the paying parent’s annual taxable income - taken from either:  
·the previous year – if the annual income is solely from salary, wages and/or a benefit and the tax return does not need to be filed, or  
·two years ago – if the paying parent earns other income (for example rental or self employed) and/or they need to file a tax return (the taxable income will be taken from the tax return filed two years ago), or  
·two years ago – if the paying parent lives outside New Zealand. The taxable income used is the income earned overseas two years before the current year (in the equivalent New Zealand income year), plus any income earned in New Zealand.

b is the living allowance which is based on the Ministry of Social Development’s benefit amounts, and depends on the paying parent’s family situation.

c is the percentage used in the formula, which depends on the number of children, and how often the paying parent cares for them. If the paying parent shares the care of the children, the percentages may vary.

Key Child Support Statistics

·Minimum weekly payment—$12.75  
·Maximum income that payments can be assessed on $86,684  
·18,500 employers who deduct child support payments from their employees  
·Since implementation a total of 88.7% of all child support assessments made have been collected—approximately $1.56 billion  
·For each month during the year ended 30 June 2002, 65.7% of all paying parents (on average) paid their child support in full and on time.

Child Support assessment and collection rates have steadily increased over time. The large rise in the past year is due to a change in the income year that salary and wage earners are assessed on for their child support payments.

Inland Revenue’s role

Child Support’s primary outcome is to ensure:

Children receive financial support from parents who live apart

This is achieved by:

·informing people of their rights and obligations under the Child Support Act  
·assessing child support liabilities  
·collecting and banking child support payments  
·disbursing child support payments to custodians  
·taking action against those who do not comply with child support legislation  
·raising awareness of child support within the community.

Inland Revenue provides an administrative process for reviewing child support assessments that is a free, accessible way of having a child support formula assessment looked at. It is open to both custodial and non-custodial parents. This process allows a child support formula assessment to be reconsidered if it is deemed to be unjust or if special circumstances apply. Child Support also administers residual spousal maintenance orders.

Child Support has around 500 staff and is budgeted to cost $49.582 million for this financial year.

Child Support administration is a complex area of social policy that often involves multiple relationships. A liable parent may have responsibilities to more than one custodial parent, likewise a custodial parent may be entitled to receive child support from more than one former partner. The importance of education is recognised as a vital factor in improving voluntary compliance. The roles of the Child Support Community Liaison Officer and Mobile Officer were developed in response to this.

·Community Liaison Officers (CLOs) raise awareness of Child Support and its role in encouraging parents to take responsibility for their children and in doing so, raise community awareness of parents’ obligations to support their children.  
·Mobile Officers provide customers with a highly personalised service to achieve and maintain high levels of voluntary compliance, targeting customers identified as responding best to face-to-face contact.

Family assistance

Family assistance (FAM) is financial help to low or middle income families with dependent children. The level of assistance is related to income level, and abates as income rises. It is paid either with each pay through the year, or at the end of the year as the customer chooses.

Note: Average payment is calculated using Total Family Assistance annual entitlement, which is based on a family’s total income and number of children. In some cases this entitlement may be a debit because the Ministry of Social Development have made payments during the year that exceed the annual entitlement.

There are four components of family assistance, grouped into two packages.

·Family support  
·Family Plus—this has three components  
–Parental Tax Credit  
–Child Tax Credit  
–Family Tax Credit.

Eligibility and payments vary according to the particular benefit, family composition, employment circumstances and income. Basic entitlements are abated against joint family income.

Family Support

Family Support is assistance paid to low-and middle-income families. It is paid either by Inland Revenue or by the Ministry of Social Development, depending on income level and whether income-tested benefits are received. A family with one child under 13 must earn less than $30, 946 a year to receive any family support.

Parental Tax Credit

The Parental Tax Credit is paid to working families for up to eight weeks after the birth of a baby. The entitlement is up to $1,200. A couple who have their first child, must earn less than $59, 618 a year to receive any Parental Tax Credit. Parents are not able to receive both a Parental Tax Credit and Paid Parental Leave (introduced in July 2002). Therefore it is likely the number of recipients of the parental tax credit will decline.

Child Tax Credit

The Child Tax Credit is paid to working families . The maximum rate of child tax credit is $780 a year or $15 per week for each dependent child aged 18 years or under.  
A family with one child under 13 must earn less than $33,546 a year to receive some money from the Child Tax Credit.

Family Tax Credit

The Family Tax Credit guarantees a minimum after-tax family income for working families of $18, 368 a year. It has a number of qualifying criteria including minimum work hours, and that the income is not from being self-employed.

Inland Revenue’s role

Inland Revenue pays family assistance to families whose main income is from working. The Ministry of Social Development pay family support where the only income is from an income-tested benefit. However, recipients with a family income of $20 000 or more a year from an income-tested benefit as well as other income, are paid by Inland Revenue as this helps to avoid overpayment of family assistance as Work and Income are unable to abate payments.

Inland Revenue pays all of the family assistance components to working families, either as a fortnightly payment or in a lump sum at the end of the tax year.

Inland Revenue’s primary outcome for family assistance is:

Eligible families with dependent children receive the financial support they are entitled to

To ensure this outcome is achieved Inland Revenue provides services and education to eligible families so that they are aware of their entitlements and to ensure they receive the correct entitlement. Ensuring that families receive their entitlements contributes to their ability to participate in their communities and to society in general.

The income-contingent nature of the family assistance measures requires a significant interface with the systems used to administer the tax regime, therefore the administration of these measures is fully integrated into the tax administration system.

Paid Parental Leave

Paid Parental Leave is a paid entitlement that began on 1 July for birth mothers, their partners and adoptive parents. Paid Parental Leave was introduced to help with the loss of income that working parents experience when they take leave from work to care for a new baby or child. Parents qualify for the payment if they meet the requirements for parental leave. If a birth mother or adoptive parent intends to return to work before the 12 week entitlement is finished, they can still receive Paid Parental Leave payments for the time they are on parental leave.

The Department of Labour administers the Paid Parental Leave Scheme. It is also responsible for communicating information about the Scheme to the public.

Key Statistics

·maximum payment per week is $325 gross or 100% of normal gross pay, whichever is lower  
·paid for up to 12 weeks from the birth or adoption of the baby or child  
·budgeted for 20,000 applications per year.

Inland Revenue’s role

The Department of Labour has contracted Inland Revenue to process Paid Parental Leave application forms, make payments and answer customer enquiries.

Inland Revenue is responsible for ensuring any potential applicants are aware of their choice between Paid Parental Leave and Parental Tax Credit (a component of the family assistance entitlements) and provides sufficient information to individuals to enable an informed choice. It also ensures that no Parental Tax Credit is paid for children that Paid Parental Leave is paid for and vice versa.

In the rare situations where a recipient is overpaid Paid Parental Leave, Inland Revenue can accept and process repayments.

Student loans

Introduced in 1992, the Student Loan Scheme is designed to support the participation of all New Zealanders in tertiary education by providing access to finance for tuition fees and other education-related costs. The scheme provides money on terms more generous than are available for similar unsecured loans from the private sector.

For most borrowers, debt repayment is income contingent, which means that borrowers are not required to repay any money until they earn sufficient income. Repayments are based on 10 cents in every dollar earned over the repayment threshold. However, voluntary payments can be made at any time and are encouraged. The Scheme also recognises that some borrowers may not be earning sufficient income to allow them to meet the interest charged each year. If this is the case, borrowers may qualify for an interest write-off.

Inland Revenue’s role

Inland Revenue’s primary outcome for student loans is:

Student loans are paid off as soon as practicable

Inland Revenue is responsible for the assessment and collection of student loan repayments and determines any entitlement to an interest write-off or reduction.  
Additionally, Inland Revenue is responsible for the Student Loan Scheme Act 1992 and its regulations which set the interest rates, interest write-off threshold and repayment threshold.

Inland Revenue produces reports quarterly, which are posted on the website. These reports give key statistical data on student loans, loan borrowers, interest rates, overdue debt levels, write-offs and interest write-offs.

Key Statistics

·Total interest rate—7%pa. Made up of base interest rate 5.1% and inflation adjustment rate 1.9%.  
·Number of borrowers—366, 242  
·Total loan balance owing $4.5 billion  
·Total loan balance owing from overseas borrowers $326 million  
·Average amount owed per borrower $12,643  
·Highest loan balance $166,228  
·Repayment threshold $15, 496  
·Overdue debt—1.65% of total borrowing.

Number of borrowers and range of loan balances

The graph below shows that the majority of student loans are under $10,000.

Student loan total balance v percentage overdue debt

The following graph shows that the percentage of overdue debt for student loans, which although low at 1.65%, has started to increase as a percentage of the total balance.

CALL MANAGEMENT

One of the central elements of our commitment to meeting our Charter is our ability to provide a timely and accurate service through our call centres. The call centres were introduced in April 1999. Since that time call volumes have risen significantly, although 2000/01 figures were influenced by two personal tax summaries being distributed in the same financial year.

Includes customer contacts from Taxpayer Information Services, Income Maintenance, Student Loans and ACC output classes (excludes Child Support)

Strategies have been put in place to ensure that the call centres have performed significantly better with improved customer satisfaction, reduced wait times and lower abandonment rates. For example:

Speed to answer calls

In the year 2000 the average speed to answer a call was 3m 30s.  
In the year 2001 the average speed to answer a call was 2m 30s.  
In the year 2002 the average speed to answer a call was 1m 30s.

Employer and tax agent calls are prioritised as they are fundamental to the tax system, representing a wide range of tax types and having a significant effect on the tax base. Although the number of manual calls received this year fell slightly (143,157) the number of tax agents calls increased by 21% (727,789 calls received). However, in all cases the abandonment rate fell significantly over the past year.

Our average abandonment rate this year was 11%. The worst month this year was in July 2001 and that was still below the average for the whole of the year, before which was 26.5%.

In 93% of calls staff are able to resolve the query during the call without the customer having to call back.

Call centres are continuing to improve training, recruitment and performance management processes for staff. These measures may have contributed to a significant reduction in staff turnover, which is down by 33% over the same period last year at 30% for the year ended June 2002.

Additionally, some new technology has also been introduced to better manage call flows and therefore improve service performance.

There are, however, times throughout the year when the volume of predicted calls is greater than call centre capacity, for example, the release of personal tax summaries.  
Call centres work with other parts of Inland Revenue to utilise their staff to answer these additional calls. This effort has delivered our best peak call service to the community, evidenced by lower wait times for taxpayers.

At the end of June there have been 81 days where the number of calls exceeded 17,500. This was lower than in 2000/2001, where there were 151 days. The reduction in these peak days is partly due to the management of major events that drive demand. Inland Revenue has now implemented an integrated planning approach that involves all parties in the event planning four months in advance and has been able to spread the distribution of mail in order to smooth some of the large peaks. In 91% of these days call centres achieved their performance target of an average wait time of less than five minutes, with the average wait less than two minutes.

Days over 17,500 mostly occur due to tax season events such as:

·the issuing of the personal tax summary (issued over 360,000) and summary of earnings (issued over 700,000) at the end of the tax year  
·family assistance change of address or circumstances mailout  
·the sending out of reminder notices for late filers (policing rounds).

Ensuring consistent and quality advice

All call centre and Inland Revenue staff have access to a Knowledgebase, an intranet based tool that provides answers to customer queries. All call centre staff are trained on the effective use of this tool.

To enhance the quality of our call answering, all call centre staff have some of their calls monitored. Approximately 32,000 calls are monitored per annum. The results of this monitoring process are used to improve staff performance and ensure the correct use of procedures and tools, such as the Knowledgebase.

Staff development

All call centre staff have a performance management framework for their development. As part of this framework, we are piloting the National Certificate in Call Centre Operations – this will give staff a NZQA call centre qualification.

The call centres have developed a thorough recruitment process based on an assessment model using on a wide variety of appropriate tools. They also continue to place health and safety as a priority with on site Employee Assistance Programme services, work station assessments and vision tests.

Initiatives to improve call centre performance

In the medium to long term the Department has these strategies to continue to improve telephone service:

·improving the forecasting and event planning of call demand across both business and personal queues  
·working more closely with other parts of Inland Revenue to understand why taxpayers call and develop alternative contact avenues such as the website  
·continuing to refine the recruitment and training strategies to encourage lower staff turnover in the call centres and higher skill levels  
·utilising other Inland Revenue staff to help answer phones during the peak volume periods to ensure we meet our performance targets throughout the year.