---
title: "Young Nick's Head protected"
date: 2002-08-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14671
ministers:
  - Michael Cullen
portfolios:
  - Finance
---

9 August 2002Media Statement  
Young Nick’s Head protected

“Young Nick’s Head will be protected and the cliffs, pa site and peak of Te Kuri gifted into public ownership as part of a purchase deal for Young Nick’s Station,” Finance Minister Michael Cullen and Associate Minister for Land Information Paul Swain announced today.

The key historic, iconic and culturally significant sites on Young Nick’s Head will remain in New Zealand hands in perpetuity.

The purchaser, New York financier John Griffin, has also agreed to establish an open covenant through the Queen Elizabeth II Trust to protect the remainder of the headland area from commercial development.

Mr Griffin has offered to set up a trust with Ngai Tamanuhiri to preserve and protect the cultural and historical values of the property.

Access rights will be preserved.

These commitments are enforceable by the Overseas Investment Commission.

“Ironically, it is only because the property is being sold to an overseas buyer that we were able to impose conditions upon the sale. That would not be the case were it being bought by a New Zealander,” the Ministers said.

“We believe this is a constructive solution, entered into in good faith by Mr Griffin, which recognises the iconic importance of this site to both Maori and Pakeha and we urge all parties with an interest in the headland to work constructively together.”

Mr Griffin came into the picture after an attempt by Ngai Tamanuhiri last year to buy the property for $4 million failed through lack of finance.

The Ministers said every effort had been made to accommodate Ngai Tamanuhiri’s concerns, including the exploration by the Department of Conservation last month of an option whereby the headland would be subdivided off and bought by the Crown.

But the advice to the Ministers was that the farm was already a marginal economic proposition and that this would make it unviable.

“The station needs investment to restore its production and conservation value. Mr Griffin plans to upgrade it, landscape and plant it. He will also restore the manager’s house and build a home for himself.

“These improvements will be of benefit to the local economy,” the Ministers said.

Contact: Patricia Herbert \[press secretary] 04-471-9412 or 021-270-9013. E-mail: patricia.herbert@parliament.govt.nz

Attached:  
Timeline.  
Letter from the Ministers to the Overseas Investment Commission outlining the reasons behind their decision.

TIMELINE  
DateEvent/Action  
November 2000Property listed for sale with Wrightson’s Real Estate  
7 March 2001Tu Wyllie entered into an (unsigned) agreement to purchase the property subject to the agreement of Ngai Tamanuhiri trustees and to obtaining finance for $4 million  
7 June 2001Sale offer to Ngai Tamanuhiri lapsed  
30 January 2002Sale and Purchase contract entered into by Griffin to purchase the property for $4 million  
1 FebruaryNew OIC farm land rules came into force (substantial and identifiable benefits and advertising requirements)  
18 FebruaryGriffin lawyers wrote to Ngai Tamanuhiri inviting them to participate in the development of Griffin’s plans for Nick’s Head Station – including the landscape plan.  
8 MarchGriffin’s lawyers meet with Ngai Tamanuhiri to discuss how Griffin can address aspirations of Ngai Tamanuhiri in respect of Nick’s Head – particularly, access to wahi tapu and the foreshoreNgai Tamanuhiri propose to Griffin that he sell the headland to them and lease it back  
15 MarchTu Wyllie phones OIC to enquire about process  
20 MarchTu Wyllie indicates to OIC that Ngai Tamanuhiri will be making a submission to the OIC opposing the sale of Nick’s Head Station to Griffin  
22 MarchGriffin indicates that the Ngai Tamanuhiri proposal is not acceptable via a letter.Griffin’s lawyers give Tu Wyllie a draft copy of the landscape plan and ask Ngai Tamanuhiri for input  
2 AprilOIC application made  
16 AprilSubmission made to OIC by Ngai Tamanuhiri  
9 MayMeeting between Griffin lawyers and Ngai Tamanuhiri  
21 MayTrust proposal given to Ngai Tamanuhiri by Griffin’s lawyers  
31 MayTelephone conversation – Griffin/Tu Wyllie  
6 June2nd Ngai Tamanuhiri submission to OIC – continuing to oppose application  
19 JuneOIC notified that the Historic Places Trust had received a proposal to register a wahi tapu area on Young Nick’s Head  
20 JuneOIC report to Ministers  
28 JuneMinisters announced 6 week extension for further dialogue between Griffin and Ngai Tamanuhiri  
30 JuneOriginal contract expiry date  
3 JulyGriffin lawyers wrote to Ngai Tamanuhiri seeking dialogue  
6 JulyNgai Tamanuhiri replied indicating not prepared to discuss Trust proposal or other matters unless the issue of Ngai Tamanuhiri owning the headland was addressed first  
7 JulyGriffin’s lawyers indicate by email a desire to still meet with Ngai Tamanuhiri  
15 JulyOccupation of Nick’s Head  
21 JulyDr Cullen announces involvement of DOC  
25 JulyHikoi departs Muriwai  
5 AugustHikoi arrives at Parliament  
9 AugustContract expiry date. Final OIC report to Ministers.