---
title: "Australia/NZ Open Skies Agreement Signed"
date: 2002-08-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14662
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Air services between New Zealand and Australia were today formalised with the signing of an “open skies” air services agreement by New Zealand Acting Transport Minister Judith Tizard and Australian Transport Minister John Anderson in Auckland.  
“I am particularly pleased to be signing this treaty because it is Australia’s first “open skies” agreement. Given that Australia is New Zealand’s most important bilateral economic partner, it is fitting that its first open skies agreement be with New Zealand,” said Ms Tizard.  
“Australia is our most important market in terms of inbound tourism, and also as a destination for New Zealand travellers. New Zealand has sought less restrictive air services arrangements for many years.  
“The treaty formalises a memo of understanding we signed in November 2000. It allows airlines of both sides of the Tasman to operate services beyond the other country, over any routing they choose, and with as many flights as they like.  
“Previously such services were limited to the equivalent of 12 Boeing 747 services a week, and to a maximum of 11 countries. Airlines were required to file fares for approval.”  
The Agreement has taken over a decade to develop and encompasses the Single Aviation Market (SAM) Arrangements, signed in 1996. It also replaces New Zealand’s oldest bilateral air services agreement, which was signed in 1961.

A digital photo of the signing is available.