---
title: "National fails to appoint economic development spokesperson"
date: 2002-08-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14694
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Jim Anderton is amazed that that the National Party still doesn’t appreciate economic, industry and regional development, even after having been punished for failing to deliver economic development when they were last in Government.

“I was surprised to see that the National leader forgot to appoint an economic development spokesperson in yesterday’s reshuffle.

“I was further amazed when I read on and found there was no industry spokesperson either and regional development was given to number 15, John Carter.

“This shows that all the work of the last two and a half years in economic industry and regional development hasn’t even registered with the National Party.

“National is obviously oblivious to the successes in Industry sectors such as wood processing, textiles, clothing and footwear. It is unlikely they would be interested in the taskforces in biotechnology, information technology and the creative industries, and it seems likely they would have only the vaguest interest in Industry New Zealand’s work with businesses and industries.

“For the first time in many years all New Zealand’s regions are in positive growth mode and this has had a significant impact in our regions and local communities.

“The National party’s lack of interest in economic, industry and regional development may well explain why the regions turned their backs on them in the last election – the people of New Zealand’s regions are no one’s fools,” said Jim Anderton.