---
title: "Belgrave reappointed to Commerce Commission"
date: 2002-08-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14807
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Commerce
---

John Belgrave has been re-appointed as Chair of the Commerce Commission.

In making the announcement, new Commerce Minister Lianne Dalziel said the two-year appointment took effect from 25 August 2002.

John Belgrave has been extensively involved with both the development and implementation of competition policy in New Zealand. He has previous roles as Secretary of Commerce and Secretary for Justice and an extensive knowledge of consumer interests, having been responsible for the Ministry of Consumer Affairs. He is a former Chief Executive of both the Bankers’ Association and Electrical Supply Association.

In his first term as Commission Chair, John Belgrave was responsible for implementing significant Commerce Act amendments and the Commission’s new regulatory responsibilities in the telecommunications, electricity and dairy industries.

"John’s depth of experience will continue to be invaluable and will provide stability as the Commission implements its new regulatory and enforcement responsibilities," Lianne Dalziel said.

John Belgrave’s Work History:

1994 – 1997Secretary, Department of Justice & Ministry of Justice  
1989 – 1994Secretary, Ministry of Commerce (including Ministry of Consumer Affairs)  
1985 – 1987Comptroller (Chief Executive), Customs Department  
1982 – 1985Assistant Director General, Ministry of Agriculture & Fisheries  
1980 – 1982Assistant Secretary, Department of Trade & Industry  
1976 – 1980Minister (Commercial) & Senior Trade Commissioner, Tokyo  
1973 – 1976Director of Price & Stabilisation, Department of Trade & Industry  
1969 – 1972Trade Commissioner & Consul General Melbourne, Board member Melbourne Chamber of Commerce  
1964 – 1968Second Secretary (Commercial) New Zealand High

Attachment:  
Role of the Commerce Commission  
The Commission is responsible for promoting and protecting competition and fair trade in New Zealand markets through its statutory enforcement and adjudication functions under the Commerce Act 1986, the Fair Trading Act 1986, the Electricity Industry Reform Act 1998, the Dairy Industry Restructuring Act 2001, and the Telecommunications Act 2001. In 2001, the Commission began setting up new regulatory regimes for the telecommunications, electricity and dairy industries.

Appointment of Chair of the Commerce Commission  
The Governor-General, on the recommendation of the Minister of Commerce, appoints the members of the Commission. The Commission must consist of not less than six and not more than eight members, of whom at least three must be barristers and solicitors. One member of the Commission is appointed as Chair.

Terms of appointment  
Commerce Commission Members can hold office for a term up to five years and may be re-appointed. Guidelines from the State Services Commission recommend that members of statutory boards serve no more than two terms. Board members may resign by written notice or may be removed from office by the Minister for prescribed failings.