---
title: "National Burns Unit to be built at Middlemore Hospital"
date: 2002-08-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14761
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King today announced a new National Burns Unit will be established at Middlemore Hospital.

Ms King said the $4.3 million project will see the current burns unit at Middlemore Hospital upgraded to provide a dedicated and separate burns unit, consisting of four isolation rooms for high-dependency patients, six beds including a double room and two semi-self contained rooms for patient rehabilitation.

"Middlemore Hospital has been treating serious burns patients throughout New Zealand over the past 50 years, and I am very pleased that the specialist burns team at Middlemore will be able to treat patients in upgraded facilities that are dedicated for burns treatment," Ms King said.

"The treatment of burns tends to be lengthy and requires the input of many people, including burns and plastic surgeons, physiotherapists, specialist burns nurses and counsellors who specialise in trauma.

"Burns patients need intensive treatment and have unique requirements for wound management, infection control and rehabilitation and these developments will provide patients with a higher standard of care.”

Negotiations for a formal funding agreement between Counties Manukau District Health Board, ACC, and the Ministry of Health is expected to be reached by the end of September. Construction could then begin.

There will also be ongoing work, involving District Health Boards and plastic surgeons on clinical guidelines and the level of referral for severe burns.

For more information, contact Dionne Barton (04) 470 6851.