---
title: "Clendon Community Renewal Launched"
date: 2002-08-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14884
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Housing
---

Housing Minister Mark Gosche today launched the Clendon Community Renewal Programme in Auckland.

Housing New Zealand Corporation’s Community Renewal programme is designed to rejuvenate specific communities, where there is a high concentration of state housing, to address social issues affecting residents.

A key driver of Community Renewal is to stimulate community activity and help residents get involved in the future of their neighbourhoods.

“This programme is not just focused on the houses themselves. Community Renewal also addresses social issues affecting local residents with the aim of making Clendon a better, safer place to live,” said Mr Gosche.

A key component of Community Renewal is the commitment to developing partnerships with other government and community agencies, community members, residents and in this case the Manukau City Council.

“These partnerships are critical to the success of Community Renewal and will ensure that we’re all working together to achieve the goal of a brighter future for Clendon,” said the Minister.

He was speaking at the opening of the Housing Information Centre designed as a base for the Clendon Community Renewal project. It is a place for residents to find information on housing, youth aid, budgeting, employment and legal advice and is also where HNZC tenancy managers will be based.

“We invite all residents of Clendon to drop in to the centre to pick up relevant and current information about what is happening in their area. A community room will also be available for community groups requiring space to conduct meetings.

“I believe that Community Renewal is in the best interests of the wider community as it will help residents tackle problems that are threatening to undermine their community,” said the Minister.

Clendon is the third Community Renewal programme to be launched, following projects already established in Christchurch and Rotorua.