---
title: "America’s Cup Music Showcase"
date: 2002-08-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14751
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

New Zealand music will be promoted to the international music and media industries in a government-funded programme linked to the America’s Cup, Prime Minister Helen Clark and America’s Cup Minister Trevor Mallard announced today.

Helen Clark launched New Zealand Music Week at the America’s Cup – to be held in Auckland from 18-24 November – at the Viaduct Basin today. She announced the promotional week at a ceremony celebrating the platinum success of “Nature’s Best”, a compilation of New Zealand’s top 30 songs.

“The quality and range of music demonstrated on Nature’s Best highlights New Zealand’s ability to produce music of an international calibre. Our music industry has a strong domestic following and the government wants to see it showcased to the rest of the world,” Helen Clark said.

“The music industry plays a valuable role in our creative sector, one of three key sectors highlighted in the government’s growth and innovation strategy. This musical showcase will give about 30 New Zealand artists the chance to perform live before music industry leaders from key export markets such as Europe, USA and Australia.

“Music industry leaders including record company executives, promoters, touring agents, music publishing executives, and music media will be invited to a series of performances. They will see performances in a wide range of popular music genres from both mainstream and niche-market artists.”

Minister for the America’s Cup Trevor Mallard said the government was keen to use the America’s Cup to promote New Zealand’s broad range of expertise.

“In this case, we recognise a lot of high powered individuals in the music industry also have an interest in yachting and the America’s Cup. We are using our hosting of the latter to attract them to New Zealand and gain exposure for the New Zealand music scene.

“Overall, the government is contributing $4.7 million to a range of America’s Cup-related activities with a heavy focus on initiatives which maximise the its trade, tourism, and investment potential. A conservative estimate suggests that the last America’s Cup had an economic benefit to New Zealand of around $640 million. It is an event that is well worth capitalising on,” Trevor Mallard said.

The government is investing $345,000 in New Zealand Music Week at the America’s Cup. The music industry will also support the week with $100,000 in cash and kind.