---
title: "Maori urged to focus on a solution to fisheries allocation"
date: 2002-08-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14750
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Fisheries and Aquaculture
---

On the eve of the unveiling of the proposed allocation model for the Maori fisheries settlement asset, the Government has urged the parties to “focus on a solution”.

Fisheries Minister, Pete Hodgson, said that the allocation model, due for release tomorrow (Wednesday 14th) at Hopuhopu, was prospectively the largest step ever taken to resolve Treaty grievances.

“Over the next several weeks, Maori must decide whether or not to proceed with the allocation of very large assets, in accordance with a yet to be unveiled model. Goodwill and courage will be needed to complete this process which began ten years ago next month.

Maori Affairs and Associate Fisheries Minister Parekura Horomia is pleased that the Commissioners, appointed with a clear task of consulting with iwi and Maori and coming up with an allocation proposal within two years have achieved that goal.

"It is also important to note that the Commission's decision was unanimous," said Parekura Horomia.

"Commissioners also had a specific responsibility to work towards achieving Maori support for their allocation proposals. It is now time for the Commisison and Maori to work together to achieve this next step. I call on all parties to this debate to support progress and development," said Parekura Horomia.

“The Government is very keen to see this longstanding allocation debate resolved and we will cointinue to follow the process closely. We urge all parties to reach for a solution," Pete Hodgson and Parekura Horomia said today.