---
title: "Update on NCEA workload reporting"
date: 2002-08-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14670
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard today confirmed that level 2 of the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA) would be introduced next year.

Trevor Mallard said calls to have it delayed were educationally unsound and ignored the wishes of schools that supported the system and wish to offer it to students. The Minister released the second report submitted by officials on ways to reduce NCEA workloads.

"Officials are working closely with schools to reduce the workload associated with the implementation of NCEA. That will include helping schools to substantially cut down on the amount of assessment," Trevor Mallard said.

"It is better to assess fewer standards and focus more time on teaching and learning. We are also aware that some students are being assessed against all the available standards, rather than those sufficient for a Certificate at level 1 [1](#1).

"The NCEA offers both schools and students a large degree of flexibility. Work over the next couple of months with school middle managers will focus on ways to utilise that flexibility to ease the pressure associated with the introduction of the new system.

"It may be that some schools will only offer externally assessed standards at level 2 next year.

"I expect it will result in much less assessment for next year's Year 11 (level 1 NCEA) students. For example, once level 2 is in place, the necessity for all students to complete a level 1 certificate will be reduced.

"I remain confident that NCEA is a system that better prepares secondary school students with the skills they need for the information age, than the old school certificate system.

"Next week, a letter will be sent to all parents of students registered this year for level 1 NCEA. It will background the reasons for the change and clarify some misunderstandings about the new system. This is a follow up to the information material sent to parents late last year.

"Parents can rest assured that their children will leave school with a useful qualification that will make clear to all concerned, what each student has achieved," Trevor Mallard said.

1. []()
2. The required number of credits for Level 1 NCEA is 80. Most students are taking up to 120, many up to 140.

[**See on-line Report on NCEA workload**](http://www.beehive.govt.nz/mallard/education/ncea/index.html)