---
title: "Government making progress on OECD rankings"
date: 2002-08-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14696
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Economic Development Minister Jim Anderton was surprised to read Dominion Post editorial comments yesterday (15 August) saying that ‘it is no surprise’ that the Government isn’t portraying itself as being anxious to climb up OECD rankings.

“I was surprised because only two days earlier I sent out a media release affirming this Labour Progressive Government’s commitment to economic growth. The release noted this Government has led New Zealand back into the top ten in one OECD ranking, with low unemployment.

“New Zealand’s latest unemployment figures place us tenth on this OECD scale, up four places in just two years. The June 2002 unemployment rates are at 5.1%, a 14-year low that ties New Zealand with Sweden and the United Kingdom.

“These statistics reflect the success of the previous Government’s efforts to build up capabilities and get the regions moving again. Every single region in New Zealand is booming, many at over 4 per cent GDP growth.

“However, this Government and the Progressive Coalition I lead are ambitious for New Zealand. We want even higher growth and more jobs and that is what the economic development ministry is working to achieve.

“The economic development ministerial team contains several senior ministers and is supported strongly by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance.

“This Labour Progressive Coalition Government is not only committed to economic growth, this commitment is to having a profound and positive impact on industries, regions, businesses, employment opportunities and imporved living standards for all New Zealanders,” said Jim Anderton.