---
title: "New Zealand Food Safety Authority briefing to Minister"
date: 2002-08-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14773
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Food Safety
---

Food Safety Minister Annette King says the New Zealand Food Safety Authority is working to implement a food regulatory programme that enhances consumer protection and ensures the continued health of our trade in food and food-related products.

The NZFSA’s post-election briefing to the Minister for Food Safety highlights the need for a programme that reduces the risk of food-borne illness to consumers, while being consistent and flexible. The NZFSA will be consulting widely with consumers and the food industry on this food regulatory programme.

Ms King said food safety and regulation was a topic of high interest in many countries, and New Zealand was no exception.

“New Zealand and international consumers are increasingly aware of and concerned about what is in the food they eat. And in a world that is rapidly changing in respect of food production and consumption, New Zealand needs a food regulatory programme that enhances consumer protection and ensures the continued health of our trade in food and food-related products.”

Over the next three to six months, the authority will work on the Animal Products Act Amendment Bill, the Agricultural Compounds and Veterinary Medicines Act Amendment and the review of the Winemakers Act.

The Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code comes into effect on December 20 2002, and revocation of the New Zealand Food Regulations is required by that date. The New Zealand Food Regulations have been reviewed to identify the provisions New Zealand wishes to retain after the Code takes effect.

The briefing is available on the New Zealand Food Safety Authority website www.nzfsa.govt.nz

For more information, contact John Harvey (04) 471 9305.