---
title: "Health Minister announces primary health care grants"
date: 2002-08-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14716
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King says the injection of almost $2 million into general practice and other primary health care services around the country is designed to improve access to primary health care.

Ms King said the Reducing Inequalities Contingency Funding had created considerable interest among health providers around the country.

The Ministry of Health has approved 27 applications from 14 District Health Boards in the first of two rounds of funding. The money will help improve access to primary health care services for high-need and low-income groups.

The 27 successful applications were from provider groups in the Auckland, Bay of Plenty, Canterbury, Capital and Coast, Counties Manukau, Hawke's Bay, Hutt Valley, Lakes, Northland, Tairawhiti, Taranaki, Waikato, Waitemata and Whanganui DHB areas, Ms King said.

“Successful applications were mainly funded for general practice services or for new or expanded services or staff in both rural and urban areas.

“The funding is targeted exclusively at providers serving a population group with known poor health status and high unmet health needs.

“In this initial round a wide range of primary health care providers are being funded for services such as giving low-cost access to GPs, community health workers or community nurses. It is in line with the Primary Health Care Strategy, which aims to give all New Zealanders access to good, affordable primary health care.''

Ms King said the Government had allocated $400 million over three years for primary health care, and a further $2.4 million from the Reducing Inequalities Contingency Funding would be granted in 2003/04.

In the first round, 63 applications were considered last month, with $1.9 million approved. A further $900,000 is available for the second assessment round in October.

For more information contact John Harvey, ph 471 9305

Background

DHBs were sent letters about the Reducing Inequalities Contingency Funding on 28 March 2002. They were asked to inform all relevant providers in their region about this new funding. The letter was also posted on the Ministry of Health website.

Providers were required to meet the following criteria:  
·Serves an enrolled population with known poor health status and high unmet health need;  
·Already delivers, or demonstrates plans to deliver, accessible services (such as outreach services and services provided in a variety of settings) and uses a range of providers (such as community health workers in addition to GPs and practice nurses);  
·Is working towards forming or becoming part of a Primary Health Organisation (PHO), and is therefore working towards meeting the minimum requirements for PHOs (i.e. provides the required services; works to reduce inequalities, co-ordinates care, will be funded through the national formula for an enrolled population, has community/iwi/consumer involvement in governance, all their providers and practitioners have influence, and is not-for-profit);  
·Will commit to low-cost access for all enrolled patients;  
·Has the support of the relevant DHB and the local community; and  
·Is ready (or will soon be ready) to receive funding by capitation with a current register of patients, including their ethnicity and address.

Applications supported in this assessment round

NO.DHBName of OrganisationFunding level  
1Auckland Hauora O Puketapapa$45,000  
2Auckland Ötahuhu Union Health Centre Ltd$51,000  
3Bay of Plenty Te Manu Toroa$81,600  
4Bay of Plenty Te Runanga O Te Whanau$40,800  
5Canterbury The Kingdom Clinic & The Freedom Clinic$81,600  
6Canterbury Christchurch Union and Community Health Centre$45,050  
7Capital and Coast Newtown Union Health Service$80,000  
8Counties Manukau Otara Union Health Centre$90,000  
9Counties Manukau Community Medical Centre Trust$85,850  
10Hawke’s Bay Hawkes Bay Pacific Health Services$40,800  
11Hawke’s Bay Te Taiwhenua o Heretaunga$21,250  
12Hutt Valley Whai Oranga O Te Iwi Health ServicesSee below  
13Hutt Valley Hutt Union & Community Health Service$98,600 for appn 12 and 13  
14Lakes Rotorua General Practice Group$81,600  
15Lakes Turangi Community$80,750  
16Northland Te Tai Tokerau $122,400  
17Tairawhiti Ngati Porou Hauora Incorporated$97,750  
18Taranaki Ngati Ruanui Health Tahua Iwi Authority$20,400  
19Taranaki Te Atiawa Health Runanga Medical Trust$61,200  
20Waikato Te Rohe Potae O Rereahu Maniapoto Trust$20,400  
21Waikato Te Korowai Hauora O Hauraki$45,050  
22Waitemata Te Ha O Te Oranga O Ngati Whatua$56,950  
23Waitemata Waitakere Union Health$81,600  
24Waitemata Te Puna Hauora O Te Raki Paewhenua$60,000  
25Waitemata Te Whanau O Waipareira Trust$65,000  
26Waitemata Pasifika Healthcare$81,600  
27Whanganui Te Oranganui Iwi Health Authority$53,550