---
title: "Log on to Solar"
date: 2007-02-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/log-solar
ministers:
  - Jeanette Fitzsimons
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Homeowners will be able to make informed decisions about whether solar water heating is right for them with the launch of a new website [www.solarsmarter.org.nz](http://www.solarsmarter.org.nz) and solar water heating buyer’s guide by the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority (EECA).

“We know that many New Zealanders are attracted to the idea of using the sun to heat their water but want independent information on whether it is right for their home and how to select an appropriate system,” Government Spokesperson on Energy Efficiency and Conservation Jeanette Fitzsimons says.

“The new Solarsmarter website and the buyer’s guide are an exciting step forward in the Government’s programme to increase the use of solar water heating in New Zealand.”

The launch of the website is the next step in the progressive roll-out of the new solar water heating programme agreed between the Government and the Green Party.

Other initiatives in the programme include:

- Motivating demand through promotion;
- improving quality and cost effectiveness by working with the industry including setting standards and encouraging training opportunities;
- guidelines for local authorities to reduce the cost of building consents;
- performance modeling of solar water heating systems;
- providing financial assistance to home owners;
- putting more solar water heating systems into Government buildings; and
- providing information to assist builders, architects, valuers and real estate agents.

An increased financial incentive of $500 to home owners purchasing qualifying systems will be available soon.

“Solar water heating could help many households to lower their power bills while also reducing their impact on the environment. I’d encourage all home owners, as well as people in the building and solar water heating industries, to make use of the comprehensive information on the Solarsmarter site,” Ms Fitzsimons says.

The solar water heating buyer’s guide, produced jointly with the Consumers Institute, will be distributed with the March Consumer magazine and is also available from EECA.