---
title: "New Zealand defeats secret ballots vote at IWC"
date: 2005-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23423
ministers:
  - Chris Carter
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

Conservation-minded countries have won a major victory and defeated a plan by pro-whaling nations to introduce secret ballots at the International Whaling Commission (IWC), Conservation Minister Chris Carter reported from Ulsan, Korea, today.

"Pro-whaling nations were seeking to have key votes at the IWC held in secret so nations supporting their position would have a cloak of anonymity," Mr Carter said.

"New Zealand firmly opposed this proposal because it would have meant the world's people would not have known which way their governments had voted at the IWC.

"The secret ballots issue was a crucial test of who had a majority on the first day of this year's IWC meeting," Mr Carter said.

"We were expecting to lose it, but after vigorous lobbying by New Zealand and other like-minded countries we defeated the proposal by 30 votes to 27.  
This success followed two other victories by conservation countries on more minor votes.

"We won today, but the problem is the numbers could well shift in favour of the pro-whaling nations tomorrow. A number of new recruits to the pro-whaling block, including Nauru, are expected to arrive tomorrow, altering the shape of the commission again.

Mr Carter said New Zealand would redouble its diplomatic efforts at the IWC to contain the threat of the pro-whaling majority.

"We are determined to hold the line, but this time round we are very definitely up against it."