---
title: "Hawkes Bay Maori Tourism 'Cooking with Gas'"
date: 2005-06-03
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23343
ministers:
  - Dover Samuels
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

Minister of Maori Affairs Parekura Horomia and Associate Minister of Tourism Dover Samuels spoke at a Maori regional tourism hui at the Heretaunga Community Conference Centre in Hastings, to encourage and celebrate the creation of Maori wealth.

Associate Minister of Tourism Dover Samuels announced at the hui, the launch of the Maori Tourism Facilitation Service.

"The launch of the Maori Tourism Facilitation Service will help operators to assess a range of issues that prevail in the tourism industry from product development through to management and operational issues." said Mr Samuels.

Mr Samuels further commented that" The next step as part of this service will be to provide mentors that work directly with each organistion. The net effect of this will be Maori organisations that are sustainable, and have the ability to generate real wealth for their whanau, hapu or Iwi."

Initially, a pilot programme will assess and mentor 20 Maori Tourism operators from Auckland to the Bay of Plenty, once this initial programme is reviewed a further 60 Maori Tourism operators from throughout New Zealand will be invited to partake in this service.

The Maori Business Facilitation Service will be an agent responsible for the delivery of the assessment and mentor programmes throughout New Zealand.

"There has been a heck of a lot of very positive developments in Maori Tourism over the last 3 years; this has culminated in the formation of the New Zealand Maori Tourism Council, in July of this year a Maori Tourism Conference will be held in Auckland. This conference will set a great platform for Maori Tourism operators to develop and showcase their products; Maori Tourism is cooking with gas," said Dover Samuels.