---
title: "Goff names new Consul-General to Hong Kong"
date: 2005-06-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23473
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

New Zealand’s next Consul-General in Hong Kong will be career diplomat Julian Ludbrook, Foreign Minister Phil Goff announced today.

“Hong Kong continues to be one of New Zealand’s leading international economic partners. It is our ninth-largest export market, an important gateway into the mainland China market, an important source of investment and a market for tourism and education services," Mr Goff said.

“We work closely with Hong Kong in international and regional economic forums, particularly APEC and the WTO, with the next WTO Ministerial meeting scheduled there in December. We share with Hong Kong a firm trade liberalisation commitment – we are both consistently rated as among the freest and most open economies in the world.

“Non-governmental links are also strong. Hong Kong is a key source of migrants to New Zealand; a major investment partner, and the base for the largest community of New Zealanders in Asia.

“All these factors reinforce the continuing importance of the New Zealand-Hong Kong relationship, and our strong interest in Hong Kong’s ongoing success,” Mr Goff said.

Mr Ludbrook joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade in 1980. He was most recently Director of the Ministry's Legal Division, and has previously been posted to the UK, Samoa and Paris as New Zealand's Deputy Permanent Representative at the OECD.

Mr Ludbrook takes up his posting in August. He replaces Frank Wilson, who is returning to Wellington.