---
title: "Promoting NZ wood to China"
date: 2005-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23411
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

New Zealand’s value-added wood products will be showcased in a centre in Shanghai. That's good news for our timber exporters according to Economic Development and Forestry Minister, Jim Anderton, and Trade Negotiations Minister, Jim Sutton.

The New Zealand Wood Innovation Centre, which will open later this year, is supported by the wood industry. The announcement was made by Peter Ryan of NZ Trade and Enterprise at the NZ Institute of Forestry conference in Paihia today.

“The Wood Innovation Centre project has provided an excellent example of how government and industry can work together to promote New Zealand to the world, for the benefit of our economic development.

"The support of the key players in the New Zealand wood industry has been crucial in establishing the centre. It has gained support from, for example, Red Stag Timber, Carter Holt Harvey Woodproducts, Pan Pac Forest Products Limited, Weyerhaeuser New Zealand, TDC Sawmills, and Gunns Veneers," Jim Anderton said.

Shanghai is an excellent location for the centre according to Trade Negotiations Minister Jim Sutton.

"The region is experiencing rapid growth in the development of their building and housing industries so it is ideal that the centre will showcase NZ Pine, and promote its uses through the centre’s education and training programmes.

“China is already New Zealand’s fourth largest trading partner and this relationship is set to become even stronger with the Closer Economic Relations agreement currently being negotiated. The New Zealand Wood Innovation Centre will help New Zealand’s wood industry to lift export levels,” Jim Sutton said.