---
title: "NZ First's xenophobia showing"
date: 2005-06-03
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23286
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Brian Donnelly's claims that the extra funding for international education in Budget 2005 favours international students over New Zealand citizens has shown NZ First's xenophobia yet again, Education Minister Trevor Mallard said today.

"The education package Brian Donnelly refers to is actually extra funding of $21 million in Budget 2005 for international education over the next four years, to further boost the industry in New Zealand and strengthen bi-lateral links offshore," Trevor Mallard said.

"The funding lowers the cost of Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) study to domestic fee levels for new international students in New Zealand from the beginning of 2006 and also allows the children of all international PhD students to attend school without paying international student fees.

"I announced this initiative and the extra funding while I was in India in April. It applies to all countries - not just China or Saudi Arabia – and all international PhD students, where they are supervised by New Zealand's leading researchers.

"This initiative is designed to lift the quality of research in New Zealand and improve the long-term links between our universities and international research institutions around the world.

"There will be direct benefits to universities, particularly as it will help raise the quality and output of academic research. Some of these students may want to stay on and work in New Zealand when they have finished their studies, which will also significantly raise our research and educational capabilities.

"Mr Donnelly also claims that New Zealand citizens are being turned away from higher studies because of student loans and the 200-week rule.

"This is complete rubbish - all New Zealand citizens are able to pursue a tertiary education, and currently New Zealand's participation rates in higher education are the highest they have ever been."