---
title: "TRENZ  -  a huge boost for New Zealand tourism"
date: 2005-06-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23429
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

New Zealand tourism is set to receive another boost following last week's Tourism Rendezvous New Zealand (TRENZ) event in Christchurch, Tourism Minister Mark Burton said today.

"This is New Zealand's largest business market for one of our largest and most important export earners," Mr Burton said.

"The scale of this event is enormous – there were 450 New Zealand tourism businesses at the market doing business with the more than 400 overseas buyers and around 80 registered international and domestic media representatives.

"I congratulate the Tourism Industry Association New Zealand for the fantastic job it has once again done in organising this important event for New Zealand tourism.

"I was very impressed with the high quality presentations by operators at the market.

"TRENZ shows the incredible variety and high quality visitor experiences that this country has to offer throughout the length and breadth of the country.

"Tourism is now an integral part of the economy from the smallest most remote settlement to the large urban centres like Wellington, Christchurch and Auckland. It directly and indirectly accounts for one in 10 jobs in New Zealand.

"This industry is a great example of the benefits of a strong partnership between Government and industry."

While New Zealand is seen as a 'hot destination', it can not afford to rest on its laurels, Mr Burton says.

"That's why in this year's Budget the Government invested a further $8.9 million in key overseas markets to build on the successful Tourism New Zealand 100% Pure Campaign," Mr Burton said.