---
title: "New Law Commissioner"
date: 2005-06-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23296
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

The Minister Responsible for the Law Commission, Marian Hobbs, has announced the appointment of Helen Aikman as a Law Commissioner.

The six-member Law Commission is an independent government-funded advisory body, which reviews areas of the law that need updating, reforming or developing.

Currently practising as a barrister sole and employed part-time as a Senior Consultant for the Law Commission, Ms Aikman was Deputy Solicitor General (Constitutional) until October 2003. She joined the Treaty Team of the Crown Law Office in 1994 and held the position of Team Leader of the Commercial Regulatory Team immediately prior to her appointment as Deputy Solicitor-General. Before joining the Crown Law Office Ms Aikman spent time in Samoa, as the Principal State Solicitor in the Attorney General’s Department. She has also spent some time in private practice.

Ms Aikman will replace Richard Clarke QC who resigned recently. Marian Hobbs acknowledged the contribution Mr Clarke had made, particularly in leading the team reviewing life insurance law.

"The Law Commission helps to stimulate informed debate through the provision of high quality independent opinion on many public policy issues," Marian Hobbs said. "In Ms Aikman's appointment I welcome the appointment of a Law Commissioner who will bring knowledge and understanding of the public policy process. She is currently working with Commissioner Justice Eddie Durie on the Commission's proposals for a generic Mâori entity to administer collectively owned assets."