---
title: "Minister announces Green Ribbon winners"
date: 2005-06-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23294
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

A sustainable vineyard, a woman who runs a conservation club for children and a community that looks after its own marine area are among winners of Environment Minister Marian Hobbs’ awards for environmental heroes.

"An inspiring and diverse range of people, groups, schools and businesses has been selected as winners of this year’s Green Ribbon Awards," Marian Hobbs said. "They are a fantastic group of people making a real difference to the environment and their communities."

Six Green Ribbon Awards and five highly commended awards will be presented on Thursday evening \[9 June] at a ceremony at the Grand Hall, Parliament. The awards are presented each year in June, to tie in with World Environment Day on 5 June.

"The Green Ribbon Awards give national recognition for outstanding local initiatives," Marian Hobbs said.

The Ministry for the Environment administers the awards and makes the short-list. The assessment criteria include whether the people or projects address a significant environmental issue, improve the environment, provide a model for others, go above and beyond "the call of duty", or introduce something new or innovative.

"I would also like to acknowledge the other nominees, all of whom are doing fantastic work for the environment and providing leadership in their communities," Marian Hobbs said.

"Of particular interest this year was the high number of outstanding entries in the Community Action for the Environment and Sustainable Business categories, showing that more and more people are doing excellent work in these areas."

The awards have now been running for 15 years, with this year’s winners taking the total number of Green Ribbon Awards to 76.

Professional photographs of the winners are available for media use.

Media contacts:  
Trevor Henry, press secretary, tel 04 471 9131 or 021 843 679, trevor.henry@parliament.govt.nz  
Ali Tocker, media advisor, Ministry for the Environment, tel 04 917 7569, 027 452 6242 or email: ali.tocker@mfe.govt.nz (for contact details and photographs of winners)

Winners follow…..

Green Ribbon Award Winners 2005

Community action for the environment

Winner - Ann Graeme of Tauranga  
For conservation work and for developing the Kiwi Conservation Club for children

Ann Graeme has been involved in environmental protection and education for most of her life, and is regarded as an environmental hero by thousands of children and adults throughout New Zealand. From 1992, she has been running Forest and Bird’s group for children – the Kiwi Conservation Club (KCC) to raise awareness of the environment and educate young people. Ann writes the fun and informative KCC magazine, with a readership of about 18,000. Ann and husband Basil have also worked tirelessly to re-establish populations of the threatened North Island weka, including on Pakatoa Island and Russell Peninsula.

Highly Commended - Waikaraka Estuary Managers Inc of Te Puna, Tauranga  
For restoring the Waikaraka Estuary

This group has done outstanding work to restore the health of the Waikaraka Estuary. Residents got together in 1997, concerned about the takeover of the local estuary by mangroves. From humble beginnings, this group has mobilised agencies, science organisations and an entire community, including a strong bicultural partnership, to work together. A catchment management and ecological restoration plan has been developed and is presently being implemented under the conditions of a ground-breaking resource consent. David Lind, the chairperson of the group, works hard to direct and encourage the many volunteers involved; along with kaumatua Jimmy Tangitu.

Urban sustainability

Winner – Landcare Research & Connell Mott MacDonald, Auckland  
For their sustainable Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research Laboratory, University of Auckland (Tamaki Campus)

Landcare Research & Connell Mott MacDonald worked side by side in this groundbreaking approach to design the Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research Laboratory. This sustainable building sets the standard for future building design and construction. The building contains laboratories and vaults housing the national insect and fungi collections. It also houses the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry’s national plant and pest reference laboratory.

Sustainable Business

Winner - Scrap Metal Recyclers Ltd of Onehunga, Auckland  
For environmental protection work within their business

Scrap Metal Recyclers has taken a multi-faceted approach to protecting the environment from the effects of their business. Their unique approach includes using alternatives to the traditional smelting operations; using presses and cutting equipment that reduce the need for gas cutting of steel; recycling scrap metal and plastics; in-house recycling of paper and glass; and collecting waste oils. The company leads by example, providing a model for the development of a code of practice for the scrap metal recycling industry.

Highly Commended - Darryl & Bridget Soljan of Ascension Vineyard, Matakana, North Auckland  
For their environmentally sustainable vineyard and restaurant

Four years ago, Darryl and Bridget Soljan and their young family realised a dream by establishing a long-term, environmentally sustainable vineyard and restaurant. Darryl is the fifth generation of his family to be involved in the wine industry and is committed to leaving the land in good shape. Their solution includes a very sophisticated waste management system, including worm composters and a wetland. The wetland, established with 6000 native plants, attracts native birds and frogs and provides a great experience for several thousand visitors a year. Ascension Vineyard also uses organic materials and recycles.

Rural Sustainability

Winner- John Paterson, deer farmer of Rotorua  
For his contribution to progressing environmental sustainability in the deer industry

John has been nominated by the industry he represents because of his commitment and passion for raising environmental awareness and providing resources for New Zealand’s deer industry. He is seen as a leader and a role model for others in the industry. Without John’s efforts the industry would not have made the progress it has towards incorporating sustainable land management practices at all levels. This includes addressing the environmental challenges of deer farming, including soil, water, shelter and shade management.

Highly Commended – David and Ngaire Bryant of Kereru, Hastings  
For farming sustainably and encouraging other farmers to do the same

The Bryants are superb role models for other landowners. They have transformed their farm to increase its sustainability. This includes fencing off 10km of gully, stream and gorge; establishing numerous woodlots, shelter belts and plantations; retiring 150 hectares from grazing; and covenanting 37 hectares to the QEII National Trust. They have also educated and encouraged other farmers through their involvement in farm organisations and field days.

Young people making a difference

Winner - Otahuhu Intermediate School, Auckland  
For working on restoring Otahuhu Creek and educating their community about it through the children

Staff and students of Otahuhu Intermediate School have developed a long-term vision for restoring Otahuhu Creek, which runs alongside the school grounds and has cultural and historical significance. The creek is part of Tamaki Estuary. The school has cleared waste from the creek and built an on-site nursery to help an estuary bank planting programme. This will encourage wildlife back into the area, and the school hopes the area will become a resting place for birds travelling across the country. The students have consulted with the local iwi Ngati Whatua, and run an education programme for groups within the community on the value and importance of preserving the creek. The Principal is Athol Cartwright.

Highly Commended - Kimbolton School, Northern Manawatu  
For working hard to raise awareness of a remnant native forest

Since 2004, a group of students aptly named the ‘Green Team’ have worked hard to raise awareness of the Kimbolton Bush – a remnant native forest that escaped major fires in the district in 1898. Working with the Department of Conservation, Horizons Regional Council and the community, the team has been involved in preserving the reserve. They have helped with information sheets and presentations. They have also shared their knowledge and passion with their community, other schools and interested groups by taking guided tours through the bush reserve. The principal is Linda Campbell.

Highly Commended - Hawke’s Bay Youth Environment Council  
For establishing and running regional youth environment forums

This group accepted Environment Minister Marian Hobbs’ challenge at the 2003 Ministry for the Environment Youth Environment Forum to “go back to their region and set up a regional forum to make things happen”. This dedicated and committed group of young people have worked hard to be one of the first to create and successfully run regional youth environment forums; involving Hawke’s Bay high school students in environment issues. They have also established a paper recycling system for secondary schools in their region.

Caring for our water – fresh and sea water

Winner - Guardians of Fiordland Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc  
For developing their own community-led strategy to sustainably manage the Fiordland marine area

Formed in 1995, the Guardians of Fiordland Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc are community representatives who are passionate about the Fiordland marine area and committed to managing it in a sustainable way. They worked with their community to develop a strategy to minimise and control human impacts within the world-famous fiords of the south-west of the South Island. The government is implementing the strategy with a new Fiordland Bill, a community-led management regime, new marine reserves, and changes to fisheries management and coastal planning. The Guardians are a shining example of how communities can address significant resource management problems.