---
title: "NZ produce promoted across Canada"
date: 2005-06-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23269
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Choices supermarkets in Canada began a month long promotion of New Zealand produce today. The opening was hosted by Jim Anderton, Minister for Economic Development.

"A range of key food and beverage experts have come to see New Zealand as an excellent source of quality produce for international markets. For example, New York chef Brad Farmerie who came to New Zealand last year, Los Angeles restaurant Grace who recently ran a month long NZ food promotion and Choices Supermarkets Chief Executive, Mark Vickars.

"Canada is already the fourth largest export market for New Zealand wine. In March this year, there was a lunch at The Fish House in Vancouver featuring 28 wines from 10 New Zealand wineries. The wines were matched with New Zealand foods by The Fish House executive chef Karen Barnaby and Dana Reinhardt of CRU restaurant.

"There is clearly a growing international awareness of the outstanding quality of New Zealand wine. But New Zealand’s expertise extends far beyond wine-making. Our cheese, our manuka honey, our seafood products and much more are examples of the uniqueness and creativity harnessed by our food manufacturers.

"I look forward to many more promotions of New Zealand food and wine exports like the one today. Our food and beverage sector plays a central role in increasing our high value exports, which is why this sector has been chosen for an industry development taskforce," Jim Anderton said.