---
title: "Funding awarded for Auckland Matariki celebrations"
date: 2005-06-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23313
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

Matariki celebrations underway in Auckland will receive a boost today as Jim Anderton, Minister for Industry and Regional Development, announces funding of $66,150 to help develop the festival in the future.

The funding from the Ministry of Economic Development's Regional Initiatives Fund (RIF) has been awarded to Toi Whenua, a group of arts advisors and managers from four of Auckland's councils, together with a collection of regional organisations with a role in arts promotion.

"Toi Whenua now has the support to develop a strategic and professional plan to take this festival to the next level. The first step will be to identify potential economic development opportunities from improved management and promotion of the festival," Jim Anderton said.

The Matariki festival celebrates Maori New Year, which begins when the star constellation Matariki, more commonly known as Pleiades, rises in the sky, during June to July. The first sighting of Matariki is expected this week.

In 2000 seven events were held during Auckland's first Matariki festival. By 2004 the festival comprised of 90 events with over 12,000 people attending.

"The festival has been growing over the years since promotion began in 2000, but there is a limit to the extent it can continue to grow without stepping back to review its future potential.

"The RIF funding will help organisers expand the festival and enable Auckland to make even greater returns from the annual event through increased tourism, sales of Maori art and improved business and product development skills for participants in the festival organisation," Jim Anderton said.

The project was developed by the Auckland Regional Economic Development Strategy (AREDS) with the intention to assist Maori to build capability within the regional creative industries sector.