---
title: "Drugs Amendment part of balanced anti-drugs strategy"
date: 2005-06-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23380
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Health
---

The Misuse of Drugs Amendment Bill (No. 3), which was enacted by a large majority in Parliament today, is about updating New Zealand's drug laws and making them more responsive to the latest drug use trends, says Associate Health Minister Jim Anderton.

"This government has in place a sophisticated strategy to try and turn the tide against the harm being caused by drugs in our society.

"Our strategy includes getting very tough on the peddlers of very dangerous drugs, like the manufacturers and importers of methamphetamine and its ingredients. Our strategy involves increasing the amount of public investment on reducing the demand for drugs through community-based education and action programmes.

"Our strategy also includes investing more in the treatment services to help former drug users to get back on their feet and live a drug-free lifestyle. It also involves investing into researching the medical, health, social and economic effects that drug abuse is having on individuals, on families and on communities.

"To effectively turn the tide against alcohol and other drug abuse we need to work on all fronts at the same time. It is about central government and communities, local government and families, working together on all fronts as appropriate to reduce harm from drug abuse and this new law fits within that multi-faceted, balanced strategy," Jim Anderton said.