---
title: "Cunliffe announces Digital Strategy Advisory Group"
date: 2005-06-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23474
ministers:
  - David Cunliffe
portfolios:
  - Information Technology
---

Information Technology Minister, David Cunliffe, today announced the members of the Digital Strategy Advisory Group.

“The Digital Strategy's aim is to coordinate government efforts so all New Zealanders can get the most from information and communication technologies. The people chosen bring a wealth of talent and experience to the group's role of advising ministers on the strategic direction and focus of the strategy. I look forward to working with them to achieve the strategy's vision." said Mr Cunliffe.

The following people have been appointed:

Malcolm Alexander - Chair of the Telecommunications Carriers' Forum.

Hamish Crookes - Chairman of the Matagi E Fa Trust, a Pacific Charitable Trust to provide a vehicle for Pacific Peoples to get involved in the information technology sector through education, training, community and economic development.

Robyn Kamira - a founding member of Society of Professional Maori Women in Information Technology, who has extensive experience in Maori IT and education initiatives.

Prashanta Mukherjee - twenty years in the ICT industry and founding trustee of The Big Idea Charitable Trust, which operates the largest online community of arts and culture people in New Zealand.

Graeme Osborne - Chair of the Telecommunications Users Association of New Zealand.

Paul Reynolds - member of the Library and Information Advisory Commission and of the International Academy of Digital Arts and Science.

Katrina Troughton – chief executive of IBM New Zealand Ltd and member of Information Technology Association of New Zealand.

John Truesdale - Manager Digital Library Services, Christchurch City Libraries and involved in successful Christchurch City Council collaborative projects in IT and education.

Andrew Williamson - Executive, National Advisory Committee for Computing Qualifications, and catalyst for and leader of Community ICT initiatives in Waitakere City, including chair of the Waitakere eDemocracy Group and of the Waitakere City’s web portal.

"I am delighted with the calibre of these appointees and the strong group of nominees from which they were drawn." said David Cunliffe.

In addition to these nine members, another appointment will be made in the next few months from the community and voluntary sector. Three government agency chief executives will also participate in the Advisory Group to ensure coordination across government.

The Minister also signalled his intention to appoint several honorary international advisors to ensure the latest global perspectives are available to the advisory group.

"I will be calling the Advisory Group together as soon as practicable. I would like their input on selection criteria for project proposals for the new Broadband Challenge and Community Partnership Fund. I expect to be issuing the first call for proposals by September." The Minister said.

Advisory Group members are appointed for terms of two to three years, commencing 1 July 2005.