---
title: "Contact Energy welcomed to Hutt city"
date: 2005-06-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23471
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

MP for Hutt South and Energy Minister Trevor Mallard today officially opened Contact Energy's new retail services centre, in Lower Hutt.

"I am pleased to officially welcome Contact Energy to our community. The establishment by the company of its retail services centre here is good news for Hutt City.

"Contact is a significant business and employer for the city, and an important addition to the major enterprises that have recently set up shop in the city, or are in the process of doing so.

"Hutt city is really on the move at the moment with many new enterprises coming to the area. All this activity is a great credit to the city’s initiatives in attracting businesses, with the resulting employment and the generally enhanced economic boost to the area.

"Contact Energy's decision to set up its retail services centre here further confirms that Hutt City is indeed, as the motto goes, “a great place to work, live and play.

"I am also very pleased to learn that Contact required its service centre to be designed with the latest energy-saving features, which will both save the company money and minimise the drain on the country’s electricity supply."

Contact Energy is one of the country’s major generators and retailers of electricity. It has nine generating stations that stretch from Auckland to Central Otago and a retail electricity business that covers both the North and South Islands.