---
title: "Prince William's Visit to New Zealand"
date: 2005-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23414
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark today announced the programme for next month's visit to New Zealand by Prince William.

Helen Clark said Prince William is taking the opportunity to visit a wide variety of places and people during his first trip to New Zealand from 30th June to 10th July.

"As well as supporting the British and Irish Lions rugby tour, Prince William will also undertake official engagements while he is in New Zealand," Helen Clark said.

"Prince William will visit a primary school in Arrowtown on Wednesday 6th July and open the New Zealand Junior Mens Water Polo competition at the Waitakere Aquatic Centre, in West Auckland on Saturday 9th July.

"The Prince will conduct two wreath-laying ceremonies to mark the enormous contribution made by New Zealand soldiers during World War II. I will accompany Prince William at the event at the Cenotaph in Auckland on Sunday 10th July. He will also lay a wreath at the National War Memorial in Wellington on Sunday 3rd July. At both events, William will meet WWII veterans after the ceremony.

"In a visit which will cover both South and North Islands, William will also spend some time privately, enjoying the outdoor pursuits for which New Zealand is well-known, staying on a farm and visiting a marae to learn more about Maori culture and history.

"I am pleased to welcome Prince William to New Zealand. He is a popular and engaging young man and his visit will attract a lot of interest," Helen Clark said.