---
title: "Labour shatters transport spending record again"
date: 2005-06-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23536
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Transport spending over the next ten years is set to top $21 billion following Land Transport New Zealand's publication of the latest National Land Transport Programme, up from $18.7 billion last year.

Not included in this record total is the $500 million announced for transport last week, nor the value of transport packages planned for Wellington's Western corridor, the Bay of Plenty and the Waikato.

"This Labour-led government has spent years ramping up investment to wipe out the legacy of neglect left by the last National government," says Transport Minister Pete Hodgson. "A record $1.7 billion has been allocated for 2005/06, an increase of over 80 per cent on National's last year in office."

This Labour-led government realises that modern economies don't just run on roads. They require properly integrated transport systems including rail, passenger transport, shipping, cycling and walking facilities.

The allocation for the construction of state highways is up nearly 30 per cent over 2004/05 to $518.2 million in 2005/06. For passenger transport, traffic demand management rail and sea transport, it's up nearly 46 per cent to $249.7 million.

The contrast with National's approach could not be greater.

"National does a great job of talking up what it will do and then getting into office and completely failing to deliver. For example, in 1999/00 under the budget set by National, there were three large Auckland State Highway projects underway or recently completed with a combined value of $130.6 million. Today, using exactly the same criteria, there are $1.348 billion worth of major state highway projects either recently completed or underway in the city. That's a ten fold increase in activity."