---
title: "Goff names new Ambassador to Brazil"
date: 2005-06-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23304
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

New Zealand’s next Ambassador to Brazil will be career diplomat Alison Mann, Foreign Minister Phil Goff announced today.

“The relationship between New Zealand and Brazil has strengthened in the last few years on all fronts, reflecting the importance accorded to the region by the government’s Latin America Strategy," Mr Goff said.

“New Zealand’s Embassy in Brasilia opened in 2001. Since then, our relations have continued to develop, especially in the education sector, with large numbers of Brazilian students coming to New Zealand to study each year.

“Brazil is a country of great importance on the international scene.

“It’s a leading player in the WTO and the United Nations. We cooperate closely in the WTO on trade liberalisation matters, and in the UN on nuclear disarmament, the environment, and human rights.

“Brazilian agriculture has developed enormously in recent years and numerous links have been formed between their industry and ours. Both countries belong to the Cairns Group of agriculture exporting countries, which provides a valuable forum for policy development.

“I’m pleased to announce the appointment of an experienced diplomat to this role," Mr Goff said.

Ms Mann joined the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade from the old Department of Trade and Industry in 1988, and has previously held postings in Korea and China. She takes up her appointment in October, replacing Denise Almao, who is returning to Wellington.