---
title: "NZ Leads Move for Direct Ministerial Oversight of Tuna Fisheries Agency"
date: 2005-06-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23508
ministers:
  - Taito Phillip Field
portfolios:
  - Pacific Island Affairs
---

Minister of State Taito Phillip Field represented New Zealand at the Forum Fisheries Agency Ministerial meeting held in Majuro, Marshall Islands on Thursday 9 June. A key item on the agenda was the extent to which ministers should exercise direct oversight and supervision over the Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) as called for by the Forum Leaders at their meeting in Apia in August 2004. After debate over various options, Mr Field's proposal that ministers should henceforth constitute themselves as the governing body of the FFA and meet annually to exercise direct oversight over the Agency was adopted.

"The Pacific tuna resource is the most valuable asset the peoples of the Pacific own", Mr Field said. "With the growing complexity of the international fisheries environment, the establishment of the new Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, and the new challenges facing the Pacific nations to ensure that this asset is sustainable managed, it was time for Ministers to get directly involved"

The Forum Fisheries Agency, based in Honiara, helps Pacific countries to manage their fisheries. Its mission is "to support and enable our members to achieve sustainable fisheries and the highest levels of social and economic benefits in harmony with the broader environment. In 2004-2005 New Zealand contributed around NZ 1.3 million to the FFA.

Mr Field noted that the regional tuna fishery yielded a catch of some two million tonnes, worth more than US$2 billion.

'We are very fortunate that this vital fishery is almost the only major tuna fishery in the world that is not yet overfished. Ministers are determined that the resource shall be managed and harvested in a sustainable manner for the benefit of Pacific peoples both now and into the future"

This year's meeting of the Forum Fisheries Committee comprised of three days officials meeting (6-8 June) followed by a one-day ministerial meeting. Prior top this meeting Forum Fisheries ministers had only met twice in the past decade.

Message ends

Contact: Malo Ah-You, Senior Private Secretary, (04) 471 9044