---
title: "Police Minister praises values programme in schools"
date: 2005-06-22
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23447
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Police
---

A new school programme to teach children the difference between right and wrong will help them develop respect for other people and for the law, says Police Minister George Hawkins.

The Police Youth Education Service launched its Doing the Right Thing schools' programme at Auckland's Buckland's Beach Intermediate today. The series of lessons, which was developed by Counties Manukau teachers and police education officers, is being made available to schools around the country.

The programme focuses on five themes: Honesty, Respect, Rules and Laws, Consequences, Right and Wrong.

"Doing the Right Thing promotes values that will assist children to become responsible New Zealanders who respect others and respect the law," said Mr Hawkins, who was prevented by illness from attending today's launch.

"Learning basic values, such as the difference between what is right and what is wrong, will help children behave in positive, pro-social ways, such as being honest and fair and respecting themselves and others.

"The object of the lessons is not to preach at children, but to get them to consider the consequences of their actions on themselves and those around them.

"This Government has put a priority on tackling the key causes of crime. We're giving people an economic stake in their community by providing jobs and houses; we're promoting community awareness and we're working with our young people about the consequences of their actions.

"It is unacceptable that 22 per cent of all resolved offences are committed by under-16s and we have made the resources available to Police to tackle this issue on a number of fronts.

"This financial year the amount earmarked for Police Youth Services will rise from just under $27 million to more than $30 million. The Youth Education Service will spend up to 36,000 hours delivering its messages to classrooms around the country.

"Doing the Right Thing is one of those messages and I congratulate the Counties Manukau teachers and officers who have developed such a positive programme."