---
title: "Enhanced tourism facilities in South Canterbury"
date: 2005-06-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23515
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark today officially opened Ashburton's new Visitor Information Centre.

Helen Clark presented the Centre with a $10,300 cheque from Tourism New Zealand, which will fund light boxes to display images of New Zealand and the Canterbury region.

Helen Clark said the redeveloped Centre would enhance understanding and enjoyment of the region for both local people and overseas visitors.

"The new purpose built Ashburton Visitor Information Centre offers up-to-date information and booking facilities for local activities, accommodation and transport, and serves as a quality tourism resource for the area.

"Across New Zealand, I see the combined efforts of local and central government, the private sector, regional tourism organisations, and communities all working together to keep upgrading and enhancing the value of New Zealand’s attractions and assets.

"The redevelopment of Ashburton's Visitor Information Centre has been funded jointly by Ashburton District Council, the Ashburton Promotions Association, and Tourism New Zealand.

"The new light display boxes will be used to promote Qualmark as New Zealand tourism’s quality assurance brand and highlight visitor experiences available in New Zealand and the Canterbury region," Helen Clark said.

Funding for the light boxes comes from the Tourism Facilities Grants Programme, a small discretionary fund held by the Minister of Tourism to provide non-commercial, physical facilities for tourism related organisations.