---
title: "Naysayers on government investment should get a grip"
date: 2005-06-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23299
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

A report in the New Zealand Herald today describing the government's investment in global services company EDS's Best Shores programme as 'pretty canny', shows up the poor judgement of those who have criticised it in the past.

"The government invested in EDS's Best Shores programme in order to attract the company to New Zealand. Without that investment we would have lost an opportunity to strengthen our ICT industry, lift the skill levels of New Zealanders working in the field and allow them to experience working in a high tech global company.

"The investment agreement required the company to employ 360 people within three years, that is by March next year. Already EDS have employed 267 people in their Best Shores programme. That is good news for our ICT industry and the economy because it means we have a more highly skilled workforce and $20 million in improved export earnings.

"The naysayers such as Rodney Hide, John Key and Rod Donald need to get a grip. This is neither corporate welfare nor sympathy for multinationals but a proud policy of supporting and expanding the depth and breadth of New Zealand's industries.

"We need to increase the number of high skill, high value jobs in New Zealand in order to lift living standards and enhance opportunities for future employment," Jim Anderton said.

EDS stands for Electronic Data Systems Corporation - a global services company.

Link to Herald article here: [NZ Herald](http://www.nzherald.co.nz/index.cfm?ObjectID=10329354)