---
title: "Fieldays showcases New Zealand innovation"
date: 2005-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23434
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Agriculture
---

This year’s Fieldays was a great success, Agriculture Minister Jim Sutton said today.

Mr Sutton said the four-day event got bigger and better every year. The organising committee had done a fantastic job.

“I encourage anyone who hasn’t been to the Fieldays before, or who hasn’t been for a few years, to head up to Mystery Creek next year and have a look at the innovation, fun, and sheer scope and range of the rural sector.

“Just spending a few hours there will leave you in no doubt about the importance of the rural sector to our economy and country.”

Mr Sutton said the theme of this year’s Fieldays had been about the management of staff on farms.

“I visited the AgITO, ACC, and FarmSafe stands and spoke with staff there. They are doing a fantastic job at developing skills among those who are working on our farms now and who will be working on them in the future.

“I especially encourage farmers and their workers to take part in the FarmSafe programme. Farmers are unhappy about the size of ACC levies, but those levies are directly related to the number and impact of accidents that farmers are having.

“ATV and tractor accidents are at disaster levels. The FarmSafe programme is committed to reducing that. Many other industries have seen their accident premiums reduced as a consequence of successful workplace safety initiatives.”