---
title: "Hot tips campaign for staying safe with LPG"
date: 2005-06-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23366
ministers:
  - Harry Duynhoven
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Starting next week, a targeted LPG winter safety campaign will highlight the need for the safe use of LPG indoors, the Associate Minister of Energy, Hon Harry Duynhoven said today.

"This winter the Energy Safety Service (ESS) has partnered with the LPG Association and the Environmental Risk Management Authority to run the LPG winter safety campaign," Mr Duynhoven said.

Over 400,000 ‘swing tags’ with safety messages printed on them have been distributed to LPG filling stations around New Zealand. These will be attached to LPG cylinders when people have their cylinders refilled.

Advertisements, reinforcing the ‘swing tag’ safety messages, are also being placed in community newspapers in the areas around New Zealand where the most LPG is sold during the winter months.

"Over the last few winters the LPG Association has successfully run ‘swing tag’ campaigns highlighting the need for the safe use of LPG indoors.

"But as a result of recommendations in the 2004 Environmental Risk Management Authority enquiry into the use of LPG cylinders in the indoor domestic environment, ESS has been tasked with the co-ordination role for all aspects of work relating to LPG cabinet heaters. This includes co-ordinating an LPG winter safety campaign," said Mr Duynhoven.

The campaign’s ‘Hot Tips’ on staying safe with LPG focus on:

Test your connections:  
After securely connecting a new or refilled cylinder, apply soapy water to the cylinder connections and turn on the cylinder. If bubbles appear you have a leak. Close the valve and call an LPG service agent.

Safe Space:  
Always keep your heater at least 1 metre away from anything that could catch on fire. Put a safety guard around your heater if you have young children in your home.

Fresh Air:  
Keep a window open when you use your LPG heater, to help remove heater emission, keep the air fresh and reduce condensation. Never use LPG heaters in bedrooms and bathrooms.

Use your nose:  
If you smell gas fumes TURN OFF your heater and cylinder IMMEDIATELY. Call an LPG service agent.

Get a check up:  
Get your heater and cylinder checked before winter every year by an LPG servicing agent. So you know they’re in a safe condition for winter.

"I encourage everyone who uses an LPG appliance indoors to read and act on these important safety messages," Mr Duynhoven said.