---
title: "NZ business in good position to develop strong economic relationships"
date: 2005-06-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23266
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

New Zealand's strong fiscal position, low inflation, and very positive environment for business makes it a good choice as a global partner in enterprise, Jim Anderton, Minister for Economic Development, told a group of Canadian business people in Vancouver yesterday.

Jim Anderton was addressing the Canadian, Australian and New Zealand Business Association (CANZBA).

"There are a number of reasons for the success of the New Zealand economy. One of them is the developmental approach we have taken in economic policy. This has meant emphasis is placed on increasing the level of research and development in our businesses, increasing our skill levels and increasing our links to the world.

"For example, the government supports companies in the development of technology, the coordination of research and promotion of innovation. We have instigated a Modern Apprenticeship scheme and support industry training. And we are working to strengthen our international connections. Meeting CANZBA today is part of this work.

"New Zealand and Canada enjoy close and friendly relations. Our shared Commonwealth heritage, parliamentary, legal and defence traditions, as well as people-to-people contacts, engender a similar world view. We both believe that innovation, including the successful commercialisation of new products and services, is the key to a continuing successful economy.

"I hope we will keep building new and stronger linkages between New Zealand and Canadian businesses," Jim Anderton said.