---
title: "TVNZ Board Appointment"
date: 2005-06-03
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23288
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

Broadcasting Minister Steve Maharey has announced the appointment of John Goulter as a new member of the Board of Television New Zealand Limited.

John has been appointed for a three-year term from 1 June 2005.

"TVNZ will benefit from John's considerable governance experience both in the private and public sectors," said Steve Maharey. "This experience, combined with Mr Goulter's impressive history of success as a business leader, will be of significant advantage to the TVNZ Board," said Mr Maharey.

John is the Presiding Member of the New Zealand Lotteries Commission, Member of the Board of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and holds a number of private sector board positions including Member of the Boards of United Carriers Group and Auckland International Airport. He has had a varied career including five years as Managing Director/CEO of Auckland International Airport and various management roles with Ceramco Ltd.

The Minister has also announced the reappointment of the Trish Stevenson, for a further one-year term. Trish has been a director of TVNZ since 2000. She is a Wellington based former director of New Zealand on Air and a former manager of educational publisher Learning Media Ltd's International sales team. Her reappointment will ensure the Board continues to benefit from her strong broadcasting background and will ensure stability and continuity.