---
title: "Over $500,000 a day for new Auckland state highways"
date: 2005-06-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23298
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Spending on transport infrastructure is running at record levels under this Labour-led government says Transport Minister Pete Hodgson.

Spending on new state highway construction in Auckland has nearly doubled to $185.9 million this year. That's more than $500,000 per day compared to a yearly spend of just $93.6 million in National's last year in government. Spending on passenger transport is more than four times what it was.

"What's even more revealing is the number of long term projects now underway compared to when National held the pursestrings. There were just three major projects underway in 1999/00 worth $130.6 million. That needs to be compared with what's happening under Labour: 13 projects with total cost of $1.348 billion," says Pete Hodgson.

This record investment is part of a $18.9 billion nationwide transport plan. That plan is being put into action under the New Zealand Transport Strategy which was developed in partnership with the Greens.

"There is only one way to break the stop-start cycle of Auckland transport investment, stick with the government that is getting on with the job.

"Those that want to run anti-government campaigns on transport spending would do well to reflect on the track record of chronic underfunding and neglect of the last National government and record spending under this Labour-led one."

Auckland Large SH Construction Projects – 1999/2000 compared with 2004/05  
1999/2000  
Project Construction Cost Completed  
ALPURT A1/A2 $90.7M No  
ALPURT B1 $28.7M Yes  
ATMS II $11.2M No  
TOTAL $130.6M  
Aggregate value of projects underway = $130.6M; 1 project completed

2004/05  
Project Construction Cost Completed  
SH16, Grafton Gully $67.0M Yes  
SH1, CMJ Stage 1 $55.0M Yes  
SH1, CMJ Stage 2 $140.4M No  
SH20, Mt Roskill $167.4M No  
SH18, Greenhithe Deviation $94.4M No  
SH18, Upper Harbour Bridge Duplication $36.8M No  
SH1, Esmonde Rd Interchange $35.5M No  
SH1, Northern Busway $180.0M No  
SH1, ALPURT B2 (toll road) $365.0M No  
ATMS III $4.4M Yes  
SH20, Manukau Extension* $174.2M No  
SH1, Waiouru Connection (Transit share) $19.8M No  
SH16, Newton to Western Springs Auxillary Lane $8.5M No  
TOTAL $1,348.4M  
\* initiated procurement process  
Aggregate value of project underway = $1,348.4M; 3 projects completed