---
title: "Process for mobile termination rate decision announced"
date: 2005-06-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23367
ministers:
  - David Cunliffe
portfolios:
  - Communications and Information Technology
---

The Minister of Communications, David Cunliffe, today announced the intended process for making his decision regarding the regulation of mobile termination rates under the Telecommunications Act 2001.

On 9 June the Commerce Commission released its final report to the Minister recommending that the termination of fixed line voice calls on cellular telephone networks (excluding third generation cellular networks) should be regulated.

The Minister has stated that he does not intend to undertake a full submissions process, given the Commission has carried out extensive consultation with interested parties.

However, the Minister has decided that a short period should be allowed for interested parties to provide comments on any new matters raised in the report that were not the subject of previous submissions to the Commission, and on any other relevant information that is not addressed in the Commission’s report.

“The Commission’s report follows thorough [consultation](http://www.comcom.govt.nz/IndustryRegulation/Telecommunications/Investigations/MobileTerminationRates/reportsandsubmissions.aspx) with the telecommunications industry and other interested parties," says Mr Cunliffe.

This consultation included the publication of an Issues Paper in June 2004, a Draft Report in October 2004, a Public Conference in February 2005 and consultations on the proposed service description in April 2005 and May 2005.

"I do not intend to replicate the consultation process undertaken by the Commission in its investigation. However, if new matters have arisen that the Commission has not had an opportunity to consider, then interested parties should have an opportunity to provide comment,” says Mr Cunliffe.

The Minister will make a decision once he has considered the report, comments from interested parties and advice from officials.  
"In due course I will be taking my recommendation to Cabinet, and I do not expect to make any further comment till that process is complete," says Mr Cunliffe.

Copies of the report can be downloaded from the [Commerce Commission website](http://www.comcom.govt.nz).  
Comments, including a public electronic version, must be received by the Ministry of Economic Development no later than 5pm Thursday 23 June 2005.

Comments should be sent to:

The Manager  
Information Technology and Telecommunications Policy  
Resources and Networks Branch  
Ministry of Economic Development  
PO Box 1473  
WELLINGTON

By email to: reg.hammond@med.govt.nz

Comments will be published on the Ministry of Economic Development website.