---
title: "New Zealand industry benefits from new Naval vessels"
date: 2005-06-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23484
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Defence
---

Defence Minister Mark Burton today officially marked the "first cut" metal milestone for the four Royal New Zealand Navy Project Protector Inshore Patrol Vessels being built in Whangarei.

The Inshore Patrol Vessels are part of Project Protector, a $500 million project to build seven new ships for the Royal New Zealand Navy – a Multi Role Vessel, two Offshore Patrol Vessels and the four Inshore Patrol Vessels.

The ceremony, hosted by the contractors for the project, Tenix Ltd, was significant as it reflected the New Zealand industry involvement in the project. The value of the project to the New Zealand economy was likely to exceed $170 million, he said.

"This project will provide considerable local industry involvement that will support local employment and generate benefits to a wide range of New Zealand companies.

"The Labour –led Government is committed to supporting New Zealand industry, which has an international reputation for a highly skilled workforce producing high quality work.

The construction, fit out and launch of the four Inshore Patrol Vessels would all be completed in Whangarei, he said.

Tenix is contracted to provide at least $110 million in work to New Zealand industry for Project Protector from industries around the country including the four main cities and several provincial centres as well as here in Whangarei.

"Project Protector will significantly increase the Government's capability to meet military and civilian responsibilities throughout New Zealand's extensive exclusive economic zone, in the South Pacific and Southern Ocean.

"The seven new ships will fulfil a broad range of requirements, including personnel and cargo sealift, emergency response, a range of security patrols and at sea training for the Royal New Zealand Navy.

"The four Inshore Patrol Vessels will be large and robust enough to cross rough, open, ocean waters between patrol areas. Project Protector will equip the Navy with an enhanced fleet, that is modern, sustainable and matched to New Zealand's needs," he said.