---
title: "TV industry looks to the future on 45th anniversary"
date: 2005-06-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23272
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Broadcasting
---

Broadcasting industry leaders are meeting in Auckland today – following yesterday's 45th anniversary of New Zealand television – to look at key issues for the television industry.

Broadcasting Minister Steve Maharey says the forum is an opportunity to develop a collective response to the challenges and opportunities facing the industry.

"Public television broadcasting is thriving in New Zealand alongside a successful commercial industry," Steve Maharey said. "The challenge now is how our relatively small industry can continue to grow and move forward amidst a period of unprecedented change."

Steve Maharey said changes in technology and audience behaviour were among the big challenges facing the television industry.

"New technologies, growth in the number of channels and alternatives like the Internet and DVDs are placing new pressures on both public and private broadcasters.

"While much has been achieved in the last five years, the challenges facing the industry are probably the biggest it has ever faced.

"I will be urging all participants to think hard about the challenges for the sector and to work together to ensure we continue to build a strong and dynamic broadcasting industry."

Key issue for the forum include:  
·How local content can continue to be appealing and informative in a global market  
·How New Zealand can continue to grow its TV industry - and in particular its exports - in the face of international competition and rising production costs  
·The need for training to ensure the right skills are available from writing to post production  
·Responding to competition from new entertainment technologies

Steve Maharey said the government had invested an additional $30 million through this year's Budget to strengthen the Broadcasting sector.

The forum follows yesterday's celebration of 45 years of television in New Zealand, which began with a two hour evening broadcast on 1 June 1960.