---
title: "Ngaa Rauru Kiitahi claims settlement Act passed"
date: 2005-06-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23475
ministers:
  - Mita Ririnui
portfolios:
  - Treaty of Waitangi Negotiations
---

Associate Treaty Negotiations Minister Mita Ririnui announced today that the Ngaa Rauru Kiitahi Claims Settlement Act has been passed by Parliament, the third Claims Settlement Bill to pass this year.

The Act provides for the transfer of settlement assets agreed in the 2003 Deed of Settlement, and finalises Ngaa Rauru Kiitahi’s historical Treaty of Waitangi claims.

The settlement includes a Crown apology for breaches of the Treaty of Waitangi and its principles, cultural redress which includes the transfer of five sites of cultural significance to Ngaa Rauru Kiitahi and a cash settlement of $31 million.

One of eight generally recognised Taranaki iwi, Ngaa Rauru Kiitahi is situated between Patea and Whanganui.

"It has been an exciting week for the Iwi, which numbers approximately 3000 members, one of which is US Golf Open winner Michael Campbell," says Mita Ririnui.

"I am absolutely delighted that Ngaa Rauru Kiitahi has taken the final step in what has been a long journey.

"While the Crown could not possibly compensate Nga Rauru Kiitahi for their entire losses, I believe this settlement will give them a chance to develop a significant asset base and set a pathway forward to hopefully build a sustainable future for the coming generations," says Mita Ririnui.

Parliament allocated time this week to allow the Bill to pass through both its second and third reading. Settlement legislation for the Ngati Awa and Tuwharetoa (Bay of Plenty) claims was passed in March and May respectively. A further Bill is likely to be introduced later this year, to give effect to the Te Arawa Lakes settlement. Legislation is needed to implement some types of settlement redress, as well as to ensure that the settlement is final.

Meanwhile Treaty Negotiations Minister Mark Burton adds, the pace of settlements has increased dramatically since the 1990s, when one settlement was reached every one or two years. Now we are signing an average of two settlements a year, and passing legislation faster to implement those settlements.”