---
title: "Appointments to the New Zealand Film Commission"
date: 2005-06-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23363
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

The Associate Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage, Hon Judith Tizard, today announced the re-appointment of two members to the [New Zealand Film Commission](http://www.nzfilm.co.nz/) Board.

Current members Tainui Stephens and William Somerville have been re-appointed to the Board, each for a further three-year term from 1 June this year until 31 May 2008.

“I am delighted that both members have agreed to continue to serve on the Film Commission. They bring excellent knowledge and experience in the film industry and governance skills to the Commission and I am confident that the Commission will continue to be well served by these re-appointments," Judith Tizard said.

"The Film Commission plays an important role in the development of the New Zealand film industry and I wish to thank Tainui Stephens and William Somerville for all the hard work and effort they have put into the Commission. Their commitment and contributions are greatly appreciated.”

The New Zealand Film Commission is responsible for encouraging the making, promotion, distribution and exhibition of New Zealand films and the development of the New Zealand film industry. The Commission supports New Zealand films through investment, marketing, industry support and other activities.

* * *

**Background information**

**Tainui Stephens**

Tainui Stephens (Te Rarawa) is a television, radio and film producer and director, currently based in Ngaruawahia. Self-employed with his own company, Pito One Productions Ltd, Mr Stephens has excellent industry knowledge, and knowledge of te reo Maori and tikanga. He brings a strong Maori and industry perspective to the Board.

**William Somerville**

William Somerville is senior tax partner in the accountancy firm PriceWaterhouse Coopers. He has wide knowledge of the film industry (former Finance Manager of Cinema International Corporation, a large film distribution company) and also has considerable governance experience (Deputy Chair of the Auckland City Mission, Trustee on the Melanesian Mission Trust, a Director of Trust Investment Management Services, and founding trustee and former Chair of Artspace).