---
title: "School operations grant has seen substantial increase"
date: 2005-06-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23362
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Substantial increases to schools operational funding has been a feature of the education system since 1999, Associate Education Minister Parekura Horomia said today.

Mr Horomia was responding to a petition presented by NZEI support staff, telling those presenting the petition that he and his colleagues would consider their issues.

"I would like to acknowledge the role of support staff," said Mr Horomia. "From teacher aides, to administrators, IT technicians to librarians, caretakers to cleaners, schools cannot function without you.

"These issues will require careful consideration. The principle of community management of schools, and allowing Boards of Trustees discretion over the best way to run those schools, is important in our education system."

Mr Horomia noted that in 2005 almost $950 million (GST excl) will be spent on operational funding. This compares with $684 million in 1999, and is an increase of $265 million or 39 per cent. He says Budget 2005 delivered an extra $77.8 million increase to schools operational funding from 2006.

"This increase to operational funding comes on top of a $24.8 million a year increase provided to schools from 1 January 2005, as a result of a review of decile funding. Since 1999 this government has increased school funding by an average of $348 for every child. This equates to an increase of almost 15 per cent in real terms – that is, over and above the rate of inflation.

"In 2005/06 18 per cent of the government’s total core spending will be on education. New Zealand is now the third highest spender on state provided education in the OECD," he said.

Mr Horomia told the petitioners that Education Ministers have initiated a review of Operational Funding.

"The review will look at core costs for schools. It will look at how well the government resources these costs, and it will look at best practice with regard to key costs. The funding of support staff will be included in this," he said.

Operations Funding since 1999 (in millions, GST excl):  
Year1999200020012002200320042005  
Ops Grant684,054731,900770,730819,497866,953906,998949,204