---
title: "Customs gains more powers to stop drugs at border"
date: 2005-06-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23388
ministers:
  - Rick Barker
portfolios:
  - Customs
---

The passing of the Misuse of Drugs Amendment Bill gives NZ Customs more power to track and prosecute importers of precursor drugs used to manufacture methamphetamine.

Today's amendments creates two new offences to complement existing controls over the importation and exportation of the chemicals used in the manufacture of illicit drugs.

Customs Minister Rick Barker says that due to increased internal policing of the supply of pseudoephedrine and ephedrine based products used to manufacture methamphetamine, drug producers have turned to importing these precursors. He says the current laws for importing precursors are not adequate to combat this trafficking.

Customs seizures of these precursors have sky rocketed since 2000 when 10,300 tablets were intercepted to over 1.8 million tablets seized last year.

"The new section of the Misuse of Drugs Amendment Bill, 12AB, means that persons convicted of importing a precursor substance knowing that it is going to be used to manufacture methamphetamine will be liable for a maximum penalty of 7 years jail," said Mr Barker.

"A second new offence has been created for the importation of precursor substances "without reasonable excuse" which carries a maximum penalty of one year imprisonment. This is aimed at situations where authorities are unable to prove that the importer knows this will be used to make a class A drug and the importer has no legitimate reason for the import."

Mr Barker says that currently, when these precursors are imported through the mail or cargo, they're dealt with using the provisions of the Customs and Excise Act 1996 and also the Medicines Act 1981, but this no longer adequately reflects the fact that pseudoephedrine and ephedrine are being used to make the life wrecking drug methamphetamine. Mr Barker says he is pleased Customs now have specific powers to stop this trade in the first instance at the border.

"Importers of precursors now utilise false names and addressees, safe houses, or unwitting recipients for the importation of precursors. These techniques are identical to those used by persons or groups importing illicit drugs and need to be considered an offence," Mr Barker said.

Complementing this change, a further amendment will now enable Customs Officers to undertake controlled deliveries of precursor substances. Mr Barker said " This is an important investigative technique that allows illegal precursor substances to be tracked to the actual importer, under the control and surveillance of Customs and Police officers. "

" This power will assist in the identification and prosecution of the criminals involved in the manufacture and selling of methamphetamine in New Zealand."