---
title: "Background to Canadian supermarket promotion of NZ produce"
date: 2005-06-03
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/23276
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Economic Development
---

BACKGROUND TO CHOICES SUPERMARKETS' PROMOTION OF NZ PRODUCE  
Launched by Hon Jim Anderton, Minister for Economic Development  
2 June, Vancouver - statement released yesterday - this is a followup.

1.Currently with five Greater Vancouver locations, Choices Market is Western Canada's largest retailer of natural and organic food. They are a 100% Canadian owned and operated family business, founded in December 1990 by brothers Wayne and Lloyd Lockhart. The name 'Choices' was selected to represent:  
\*A choice between conventional grocery items and their natural alternatives  
\*A choice between health food stores with traditionally high mark-up and a store committed to offering fair prices  
\*A choice between different brand names of conventional and natural foods  
\*A choice for something better

2.NZTE identified Choices Supermarkets as offering an ideal brand partnership with the New Zealand position of fresh, safe and innovative foods. The CEO of Choices visited New Zealand as part of the NZTE visiting buyer programme and returned to Canada enthusiastic about the variety and quality of New Zealand’s fine food products.

3.As a result of this, 11 New Zealand companies shave formed a cluster using the Choices promotion as a platform for market entry and/or demand stimulation in Canada. The programme is also supported by the importers of New Zealand apples and kiwifruit, and well as suppliers of premium New Zealand meat products.

4.A sample of the participating companies follows:

**Airborne Honey**

"Airborne" is the oldest surviving brand of honey in New Zealand. What had started as a primarily beekeeping enterprise has evolved. Airborne now has a strong domestic market presence and exports to over 15 countries worldwide including North America, Japan, Asia, the Middle East and Europe.

From the in house laboratory to statistical analysis for honey identification, Airborne will maintain its lead as the most technically competent honey company where quality is never compromised. Airborne Honey produce 10 honey types, each with their own unique colour and flavours from native plants and flowers such as Clover, Manuka, Rata, Kamahi, Vipers Bugloss, Nodding Thistle, Rewarewa, Thyme, Honeydew and Tawari. Each flower has different nectar producing a different flavour honey.

**Nekta Kiwifruit Juice**

If you love New Zealand Kiwifruit, you will love the delicious and refreshing taste of NEKTA, a unique ready to drink liquid Kiwifruit. This one-of-a-kind beverage is now making its entry into Canada after recent successes in over 18 countries in the world. Even those not normally excited with the taste of traditional Kiwifruit will be surprised to find NEKTA so refreshingly delicious.

Taste aside, NEKTA is also packed with nutrients. Over 40 international studies have shown that the humble Kiwifruit is one of the most nutrient-dense fruits in the world. The average Kiwifruit has twice the vitamin-C of an orange, more vitamin-E than an avocado and as much potassium as a banana. No wonder Kiwifruit is very widely known as 'the wonderfruit'.

**Eternal Artesian Bottled Water**

In 950 A.D., Kupe, our great Pacific ancestor set out from Hawaiiki on a heroic journey of discovery. He navigated by keeping a little to the right of the setting sun by day, and steering toward the bright star Venus by night. His landing place in New Zealand (Aotearoa), Whakatane, is close to the source of pure, silica rich, artesian water. The source of Eternal is a vast, centuries-old natural aquifer located deep in the North Island of New Zealand. Water is "the element" that links our past to our future eternally.

**Forage 100% Organic Apple Glaze**

Forage is a boutique producer of 100% New Zealand grown and made specialty sauces. Because we use the fresh produce New Zealand has to offer, it only uses ingredients when they are in season.

The philosophy behind Forage is to protect and flavour and goodness of the main ingredient whilst transforming it into a condiment that can be used in endless ways. It does not use any additives or preservative. Whenever possible it uses organic ingredients. The Organic Apple Glaze can be used as a topping on pancakes, or alternatively, as a glaze for poultry or pork.

**ENZA Apples and Pears**

Because they’re harvested in New Zealand during the North American spring, these tasty treats deliver a delightful crunch all summer long. From the tried and true varieties like Royal Gala, Granny Smith, Braeburn and Fuji to wild new flavours like that of the Pacific Rose, an ENZA apple’s refreshing crunch is second to none. And don’t miss out on our luscious pears -- Comice, Bosc, and the sensational Taylor’s Gold are brimming over with the sweetness of summer.

**Olivado Avocado Oil**

Olivado is New Zealand's premier avocado oil - winner of numerous international food awards. Avocado Oil is an exceptional food oil, not only because it is one of the highest monounsaturated oils available but it also has a very high smoke point making it suitable for cooking at a high heat. It has both a unique and pleasant taste that complements a wide range of foods, especially those with delicate flavours, such as fish and chicken dishes. That's why British celebrity chef Jamie Oliver loves it and has given Olivado Avocado Oil his personal endorsement as a "must for any kitchen".

**Dom Organic Greenshell Mussels**

New Zealand Greenshell mussels, also known as Green-lipped mussels, are unique to New Zealand's coastal waters. The Blue Ocean Institute has described Dom’s Organic Mussels as the most the most eco-friendly seafood on the planet. Greenshell mussels are harvested throughout the year from the pristine waters of New Zealand's remote South Island bays. The shells are an attractive green colour, and the meat is either cream (male) or orange (female) - both have the same delicate flavour.

The mussels are grown harvested, transported, and labelled in accordance with the Bio-Gro New Zealand Organic standard for mussels. The mussels are blanched, individually quick frozen and then glazed before being graded and packaged. The product is repacked for the retail market according to Organic standards set by Guarantee Bio/Eco Cert.

**The Village Press Olive Oil**

The Village Press Olive Oil is produced from quality olives, grown in the Hawke’s Bay region, on the East Coast of New Zealand’s North Island. Hawke’s Bay’s mild Mediterranean climate and productive soils make it a food and wine lover’s paradise, with the latest taste sensations coming from The Village Press Olive Oils.

The Village Press Olive Oils are a single cultivar (not blended), first press, cold pressed, unfiltered, additive-free, kosher certified and definitely Extra Virgin Olive Oil.

**PACIFIC SEA SALTS - from New Zealand**

Pacific Salt products are premium sea salts produced from the pristine oceans surrounding the Marlborough province in New Zealand’s South Island. The inputs are sea, sun and wind and there are absolutely no additives.

Pacific Natural Salt (Fine and Coarse) is harvested from specially selected ponds chosen for their high mineral content, which enhances the great natural flavour. Marlborough Flaky Sea Salt is evaporated by an age-old process producing delicate flake-shaped crystals which are prized for their flavour, texture and versatility when combined with fine cuisine.

These sea salts are all certified organic by BioGro New Zealand (an IFOAM-accredited certifier).