---
title: "2010 sees highest annual renewable energy level in 12 years"
date: 2011-07-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/2010-sees-highest-annual-renewable-energy-level-12-years
ministers:
  - Hekia Parata
portfolios:
  - Energy and Resources
---

Three-quarters of the electricity used last year was generated by renewables, the highest annual level in 12 years, says Acting Minister of Energy and Resources, Hekia Parata.

The information was released today in the Energy Data File 2011, which details the supply, transmission and use of all types of fuel in New Zealand and also contains energy prices, international comparisons and oil and gas reserves.

The high level of renewables is attributed to new wind and geothermal energy projects, as well as good rainfall into hydro lakes.

“We are making good progress developing the full potential of our diverse portfolio of energy,’’ Ms Parata says.

“Wind generation has increased by more than 25 per cent since 2006. Geothermal electricity generation in 2010 increased by 21 per cent compared to the previous year, and steady progress is being made to develop electricity supplies powered by bioenergy, solar energy and marine energy.

“We are well on the way to achieving our target of 90 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2025.’’

Renewables made up 79 per cent of our total electricity generation in the March 2011 quarter.

Although the development of our renewable energy sector is progressing at pace, Ms Parata says New Zealand will still need to continue with fossil fuels for the foreseeable future.

Fossil fuels generated a quarter of the electricity used last year, to provide certainty of supply and additional supply during peak times.

“Our fossil fuel sector continues to be crucial in supplying our energy needs and makes a valuable contribution to our economy,” says Ms Parata.

“Our Government is taking a balanced approach to building a sustainable energy and resources future.

“We are focused on renewables, the exploration of our natural resources, energy efficiency and the pricing of carbon as we manage our environmental responsibilities and economic opportunities.”

The Energy Data File 2011 is available on the Ministry of Economic Development’s website: www.med.govt.nz/edf