---
title: "Hodgson to Canada to promote NZ biotechnology"
date: 2002-06-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14218
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Research, Science and Technology
---

Minister of Research, Science and Technology Pete Hodgson departs New Zealand tomorrow Saturday for Toronto to attend the BIO 2002 International Convention and Exhibition, the world's largest biotechnology conference.

Mr Hodgson will be promoting New Zealand’s biotechnology capabilities and business opportunities at BIO2002, where Trade New Zealand and Investment New Zealand will be leading a New Zealand biotechnology mission of 23 companies.

The Biotechnology Industry Organisation, which organises the conference, represents more than 1000 biotechnology companies, academic institutions and related organisations in 34 countries, including the United States. Last year in San Diego the convention drew 14,000 people.

“My presence at this event will demonstrate the government’s commitment to supporting biotechnology, which is one of the key growth sectors targeted in the Growing an Innovative New Zealand Framework,” Mr Hodgson said.

Mr Hodgson will also meet ministers, senior government officials and business people in Ottawa to discuss innovation policy.

“Canada has recently committed public funding to projects at 69 Canadian universities, colleges, hospitals and not-for-profit research institutions. This funding has been split between an Innovation Fund, New Opportunities Fund and an Infrastructure Operating Fund and I am keen to learn more about the thinking behind these.”

Mr Hodgson returns to New Zealand on Friday 14 June.

For more information on the conference visit http://www.bio2002.org/