---
title: "Work and Income to assist PPCS staff to secure jobs"
date: 2002-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14346
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Mahartey says that the Ministry of Social Development, through Work and Income will assist staff made redundant by the closure of the PPCS meat processing plant in Blenheim to secure alternative employment.

“The Work and Income Service Centre in Blenheim has made contact with company management about working with the company and unions to identify work options and employment assistance for its staff.

“This will be a difficult time for staff and their families and the government will ensure that those who need assistance, whether with employment services or income support, will have ready access to that assistance.

“The regional economy is buoyant at the moment and the region has one of the lowest rates of regional unemployment in the country. I very much hope that this will mean that there will be a smooth transition through to other employment.

“I do however appreciate that the meat processing industry is a highly skilled one, and that for many this closure will mean needing to supplement the skills that they have acquired within it, in order to secure employment on other industries and firms.

“The majority of employees made redundant are not on site at the moment and are involved in seasonal work, many of these in the viticulture industry.

“I am advised that the region does have seasonal employment opportunities available at the moment and that job seekers will be provided with an immediate option of moving into alternative employment.

“The Government stands ready to work with the Company, unions, local government and economic development agencies to minimise the impact on individuals, partners and children, and the community,” Steve Maharey said.