---
title: "ICT schools strategy for the information society"
date: 2002-06-14
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14301
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

An ICT Strategy designed to equip young New Zealanders with the skills and attitudes to thrive in the information society was released today by Education Minister Trevor Mallard.

“We need to create a learning culture that keeps pace with the significant changes being driven by the expansion of information and communications technology (ICT),” Trevor Mallard said.

“We need to equip our students and educators with the knowledge, skills, ideas and values they need to become lifelong learners able to use information effectively, adapt to change and keep abreast of technological advances.

“The ICT Strategy for 2002-04 is future-focussed and flexible – it sets clear directions for the next three years but allows us to continue to respond to the challenges of a rapidly changing environment.”

The Minister said good progress is being made in developing school ICT infrastructure, capability and programmes.

“Our focus is now on helping schools to extend their use of ICT to support new ways of teaching and learning. Some schools are well on the way, others are just beginning. The majority are keen to make the most of the potential ICT offers. The ICT Strategy is designed to assist all schools, no matter where they’re at now.”

“Grassroots solutions and collaboration have been major factors in the progress being made in schools. Ongoing partnerships, people working together, combining their skills and leadership – teachers, principals, boards of trustees, Maori, students and their families and communities, tertiary education providers, businesses and the government – are vital for success.”

The Minister said the ICT Strategy will also build on successful programmes that remove barriers and provide support in areas of need. “We’ve already seen great achievements in small secondary schools and wharekura where subject specialist teachers aren’t available.”

Budget 2002 added several important new initiatives to those already being implemented under the ICT Strategy. They include:

·providing high speed internet access to all schools and most provincial communities by the end of 2004  
·partnership with Australia in a 5 year project to develop online curriculum content  
·laptops for secondary teachers – reimbursing up to two-thirds of leasing costs  
·funding for 20 more ICT professional development clusters, bringing the total to 70 in 2003  
·additional funding for the education website Te Kete Ipurangi.