---
title: "Tribute to guardian and advocate of te reo Maori"
date: 2002-06-11
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14244
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

Associate Minister of Maori Affairs Sandra Lee has paid tribute today to the longest serving Maori language commissioner, Mataatua Te Arawa kuia Miria Simpson, who died in Wellington yesterday.  
"Miria Simpson set high standards and expected people to achieve them, but she also supported people to achieve these standards as well. She participated in wananga, produced high quality resources and was available to anyone who approached her for help, including me when I first entered Parliament.  
"I particularly admired 'Aunty Miria' for her success as a Maori woman who rose to the upper echelons of the academic world. In 1998 Miria Simpson was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Literature by Victoria University of Wellington for her long service to Maoridom, effectively as a 'quality controller' of the language, written and spoken.  
"She worked on many of the significant Maori and bilingual texts in recent history including Nga Tangata Taumata Rau (Dictionary of New Zealand Biography), and was editor, Wahanga Maori for the Historical Atlas of New Zealand. She also wrote Nga Tohu o Te Tiriti: Making a Mark.  
"Aunty Miria was loved and feared for her staunchness about the quality of te reo, not hesitating to correct mistakes, be they written or spoken. She was in the company of such illustrious people as Sir Kingi Ihaka and Ruka Broughton. No one doubted her commitment to quality. Maoridom is poorer for having lost her."

?Hoki atu ra e kui ki o tatou tupuna kua wheturangihia, ki te ringa o te Matua nui i te rangi. E kore koe e warewaretia."