---
title: "Get on the roll with Labour, says Hawkins"
date: 2002-06-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14278
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Internal Affairs
---

Today’s announcement of a general election meant everyone should make sure they were enrolled to vote, Manurewa MP, George Hawkins says.

“There’s still time for everyone to be eligible to vote on Saturday 27 July, by getting on the electoral roll,” Mr Hawkins said.”

If you have lived at the same address in Manurewa for four weeks, you can enrol in the Manurewa electorate," he said.

It was also a good idea to remind family and friends to get on the roll to make sure they could vote on election day.

Labour was building a better New Zealand by balancing economic and social polices.

He hoped people would give their two ticks - both their Party vote and Electorate vote – to Labour on July 27.

“Our economy has grown, unemployment is down, and there’s more investment in public and social services since Labour became the government,” Mr Hawkins said.”

A local example are the 830 new businesses and branches that the Council notes have opened in Manukau City in the past year,” he said.

Labour’s priorities were continued economic and job growth, more investment in health and education, securing New Zealand Superannuation and maintaining law and order.

Fairness, opportunity, security and a chance for all New Zealanders to share in the nation’s success were Labour’s priorities, Mr Hawkins said.

Anyone with questions about enrolling to vote, could phone 0800 ENROL NOW (0800 36 76 56) or contact George Hawkins’ electorate office at 6 Hill Rd in Manurewa.

Contact: Helen Corrigan, Press Secretary, Hon George Hawkins, (021) 270 9131.