---
title: "New primary school planned for Hamilton"
date: 2002-06-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14312
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Rototuna Primary School will open for the 2003 school year adding an exciting level to the school network in Hamilton.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard has given his approval for the Starthmore Drive school – for children up to year 6 (standard 4) - to open.

“The decision to establish the contributing primary school follows consultation with the local community and other schools nearby, and a demographic analysis of the new school catchment,” Trevor Mallard said.

"I have carefully considered their views and I know the establishment of this school will be warmly welcomed by the people of Hamilton City

“There is a school at Hukanui but this is fast reaching capacity. Latest forecasts indicate that there would be about 150-250 additional 5-10 year olds in the Rototuna/Huntington area by 2006.”

Labour MP Dianne Yates welcomed the announcement.

“The new school is going to be a real asset to the North East suburbs. It’s an area that is growing rapidly and I’m pleased the government is responding so positively to the needs of families choosing to make the area their home

“I’ve seen the design of the new school. It’s very modern and innovative and I’m sure it will be a school the community will be proud of,” Dianne Yates said.

The new school is the first primary school to open in Hamilton since Crawshaw Primary in 1987. Te Rapa Primary was relocated to a new site in 1997.

The Ministry has sought community nominations for the school's establishment board of trustees and will make appointments to the board shortly. The board is responsible for appointing staff, including the principal, and working with the Ministry to ensure the school is set up successfully.