---
title: "Aviation Security Measures Announced"
date: 2002-06-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14187
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Acting Transport Minister Judith Tizard today announced new measures to improve aviation security.

The new measures follow a recent review of aviation security by the Ministry of Transport, the Civil Aviation Authority and the Aviation Security Service, said Ms Tizard.

“The review has identified some key areas New Zealand needs to deal with, in order to fulfil our international obligations and ensure best practise standards. Many of these measures have already been introduced and developed since the 11 September terrorist attacks”.

“Our system for managing aviation security risk is considered to be world class but that does not mean we can be complacent, especially in times of heightened and uncertain levels of risk.”

“New Zealand will adopt the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards for screening hold-stow baggage. This means all baggage placed in the holds of aircraft embarking on international flights will be screened.”

An industry planning team will examine options for implementing the hold-stow baggage changes by 2005. ICAO requires compliance by 2006.

There are no immediate plans to introduce sky marshals as a result of the review.

“We consider it most important to concentrate New Zealand’s efforts on preventing dangerous items or people from boarding aircraft in the first instance.

“However this doesn’t preclude sky marshals on flights by foreign carriers into New Zealand under international arrangements with foreign governments.

“In addition, Civil Aviation legislation passed last week gives the Minister of Transport powers to further increase aviation security if he believes the situation requires it.”

Regarding strengthening cockpit doors, Ms Tizard said that the international aviation body ICAO was examining this issue in consultation with aircraft manufacturers and would be making recommendations in the coming months.

“New Zealand, as a member of ICAO, will be monitoring these recommendations and will look to implement any changes in consultation with our aviation industry.”

Ms Tizard said the government’s decisions would ensure the New Zealand aviation industry takes an approach to security that focuses on the human factors – including pre-flight security and training of airline staff (including ground and flight crew) to deal with in-flight security incidents, and the reinforcing of flight-deck access control measures.

A key part of the review’s consideration was New Zealand’s obligations to the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and especially to recent amendments relating to aviation security measures.

“The review has drawn a line in the sand and provides a framework for the work we now need to do. The review has identified that more work needs to be done, in consultation with the aviation industry, before full implementation of these measures.

“I am very aware of the fragile state of the international aviation industry and the fact that increased security measures have the potential to increase costs.”

There are a number of additional issues identified by the review that the Civil Aviation Authority and the Aviation Security Service will explore in the coming months.

“The average air traveller will probably not notice any difference as most of these recommendations affect ‘behind the scenes’ operations and procedures. However, by implementing these recommendations, travellers can have increased confidence in the New Zealand aviation security system.”

Transport officials will meet with industry representatives next week to discuss the changes.

For more information contact Gemma Gracewood in Judith Tizard’s office, 4719 871 or 021 375 510.