---
title: "New youth crime prevention initiative"
date: 2002-06-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14358
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

Justice Minister Phil Goff and Police Minister George Hawkins today launched a new youth crime prevention initiative.

The initiative involves programmes aimed at intervening to prevent at-risk young people becoming criminal offenders. Programmes will be funded out of a $1 million provision in the 2002/03 Budget.

They will operate in five priority need areas – East and South Auckland, Northland, Hastings and Christchurch.

“The initiative will provide funding to both new and existing projects, which focus on young people with behaviour problems at risk of becoming offenders or more serious offenders.

“The projects will follow three principles.  
·A community-government partnership which involves local community groups working cooperatively with government agencies.  
·Early intervention to tackle problems before they become entrenched and aimed at preventing crime and not simply responding after the event.  
·Focus on the individual needs of at-risk young people and providing an integrated approach by relevant agencies to addressing the needs of both the young person and his/her family.

“The Tamaki Pathways Trust at which the initiative was launched is an excellent example of these principles being put into practice.

“The Trust was formed in 2000 by Youth Court Judge, Peter Boshier and involves trustees from Police, Ngati Whatua o Orakei Maori Trust Board, Tamaki College, Child Youth & Family, Te Puni Kokiri and Rotary.

“Its mission is to offer options and opportunities for youth at risk in the Tamaki area.  
“It offers a range of interventions, coordinating local resources and targeting the needs of each youth with an individually tailored plan.

“It works with the family and the school to assess needs and deliver solutions.

“The Government has agreed in principle to provide additional funding to the Trust to expand the scope of its services to also target higher-risk young offenders. The amount of funding and level of service is currently being negotiated.

“This new initiative is part of an overall Youth Offending Strategy and complements reforms and initiatives aimed at serious young offenders which were announced recently.

“A safe society requires more than simply a tougher response to people after they become serious offenders. It demands also that we take the causes of crime and intervene as early as possible to break the cycle of young offenders moving on to more serious crime,” Mr Goff and Mr Hawkins said.