---
title: "Southland receives $100,000"
date: 2002-06-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14423
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton today announced Industry New Zealand funding of $100,000 for capability building in Southland.

Funding was approved upon completion of Venture Southland’s ‘Strategy for Development 2002-2005’.

The funding is part of Industry New Zealand’s Regional Partnerships programme, which provides guidance and financial support to help regions identify and develop sustainable economic growth strategies and put them into action.

Jim Anderton expressed his satisfaction at the progress being made by the region thus far.

“I’m pleased to see Southland coming together so well as a region. It’s exellent to watch local groups working in partnership with the Government to identify growth opportunities for the whole region.

“The investments this Coalition Government has made in the regions prove that sustainable regional development is possible.”

“Every region in New Zealand now has an economic development plan in place. All 14 are currently in a positive growth mode.

“Southland led the nation last year, with an overall growth rate of 7.8%.”

“This level of growth is a direct result of regions playing to their individual strengths, instead of competing against other regions. Continued growth in New Zealand’s regional economies will add up to sustainable growth for the entire country.”

Southland’s economic development strategy has identified areas where additional capability would significantly enhance the region’s economic development. The first is Strategic Projects, where expertise is needed to progress Regional Initiatives. The second is Strategic Marketing, where research is needed to identify and break down barriers to tourism development, as well as in agricultural and industrial sector diversification.

A team comprising staff, community and commercial sector advisory groups, local Iwi, the public and the Venture Southland Board worked together to develop Southland’s strategy and associated Action Plan. Industry New Zealand ’s Regional Partnership “Strategy Building” funding was used to complete the process.