---
title: "Auckland passenger transport investment welcomed"
date: 2002-06-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14417
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister with Auckland Issues Judith Tizard today welcomed transport funding body Transfund’s announcement that nearly $31 million has been allocated to passenger transport services in the Auckland region this year, an increase of 38% since last year.

“Passenger transport funding nationally this year is double what it was in the first year of the Labour-led government.”

Transfund has allocated passenger transport $85 million nationally this year. In 1999-2000 the national amount spent on passenger transport was $44.5 million, and in 2000-2001 it was $53.8 million.

Judith Tizard said the growth in passenger transport patronage in Auckland was an affirmation of Transfund’s investment in initiatives such as “Kick-Start” funding to increase patronage.

“Since we introduced patronage funding there has been a huge increase in public transport use – it is up by about 12% nationally, and 14% here in Auckland. About 60 new initiatives to increase patronage have been funded in Auckland since this scheme was introduced.

“Another first is the allocation of $3.7 million nationally in the next year to promote walking and cycling. Bids for this funding include the construction of a cycleway from Onehunga West for four kilometres parallel to State Highway 20.

“And there is also a massive increase in the allocation for alternatives to roading. There will be $29 million available for these projects nationally this year, up from only $8 million last year. Bids have been received for a variety of projects, including improvements to Auckland rail services.”

Earlier this year the Crown and Tranz Rail completed the final outstanding details of the Crown’s purchase of the Auckland rail corridor, which will allow Auckland to start developing the rail network to help address traffic congestion.

Judith Tizard said legislation to further improve land transport will be introduced as soon as possible after the election.

“The Labour-led government has been the best government for Auckland ever.”