---
title: "Parents can send children to school if concerned"
date: 2002-06-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14313
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said schools were required to provide safe supervision for secondary school students affected by PPTA industrial action.

Trevor Mallard said the Ministry had this weekend written to all school principals reminding them of the requirement and asking them to encourage parents to make use of arrangements for supervision they put in place.

“I have also once again asked the PPTA to call off this week’s industrial action which was planned before they had tabled a new claim or set in place times for negotiation,” Trevor Mallard said.

“The government wants to settle this dispute as soon as possible. We are extremely concerned about the educational effects the dispute is having. Following the events of late last week, I am also concerned about student welfare and safety.

“If the PPTA’s action to refuse to teach nominated year levels on different days goes ahead this week, parents unable to supervise their children should be aware that arrangements will be made at schools – although students may not be taught by their normal teachers.

“The Ministry of Education’s regional offices are also liasing with schools, to provide advice and support on how to minimise disruption as a result of the PPTA action.

“As stated previously, government negotiators are ready to negotiate at any time. They are currently waiting for the PPTA to table a claim.

“I also urge students to be calm and end the action that they have taken,” Trevor Mallard said.