---
title: "New Food Standards Australia and New Zealand board"
date: 2002-06-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14339
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King announced today that the New Zealand nominations have all been appointed to the new Food Standards Australia and New Zealand Board.

Food Standards Australia and New Zealand (FSANZ), will replace the Australia New Zealand Food Authority (ANZFA) on 1 July 2002.

Ms King said Hikihiki Pihema, from Tairawhiti District Health Board, Owen Symmans from the Meat Industry Association of New Zealand, and Professor Raymond Winger from Massey University are the New Zealand members of the board.

“The role of the FSANZ Board will include developing and reviewing food standards and codes of practice, developing guidelines to assist the interpretation of the Australian New Zealand Food Standards Code, and promoting consistency between Australian and New Zealand standards and international standards,” said Ms King.

New Zealand and Australia established a joint Food Standards Treaty in 1995.  
This Treaty has now been revised, and comprises:  
·The Australia and New Zealand Food Regulation Ministerial Council;  
·The Food Regulation Standing Committee;  
·a Development and Implementation Sub-Committee;  
·a Technical Advisory Group; and  
·Food Standards Australia and New Zealand.

The composition of the FSANZ Board is set out under the ANZFA Act and consists of: a Chairperson; a Chief Executive Officer; three members nominated by the New Zealand lead Minister; one member nominated by consumer organisations; one member nominated by the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council; and three members nominated by organisations, or public bodies, established for purposes relating to science or public health; and two members nominated by organisations, or public bodies, established for purposes relating to the food industry.

The 12 members are appointed for terms of up to four years. Reappointments are allowed for one further term.