---
title: "Coalition to seek new mandate"
date: 2002-06-11
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14246
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Deputy Prime Minister
---

Jim Anderton says the early election is needed so that the government can get on with its progressive direction.

He will stand on a platform of continuing the progress the Clark-Anderton government has made, and against foot-stamping and anti-democratic blackmail.

“My MPs have made important contributions to jobs, progress towards free health and education and strong, safe communities. We provide a useful alternative perspective in government that helps to keep the government on the right track. But it is a responsibility that has to be exercised reasonably and democratically.

“We have shown how to push hard for policies like regional and economic development, and the jobs that go with development, and the Kiwibank. We have ensured all policy is in the direction we support - but we don’t try to hold the country to ransom.

“I am confident we will be re-elected. I have worked hard for the voters of Wigram and I believe I will retain their confidence so our supporters will not waste their vote, and Helen Clark has indicated she would like to see me working with her back in Cabinet.

“Each vote for my team is a vote for additional MPs in Government.

“We have support from people who see us as their voice in government. The communities that are growing stronger again, the businesses that see a need for the government to be a partner in developing the economy. This election is an opportunity for those communities to support the direction of this government,” Jim Anderton said.

An announcement on Jim Anderton joining the Progressive Coalition will be made when Parliament rises.