---
title: "Investment in Auckland roading welcomed"
date: 2002-06-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14416
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

Minister Assisting the Prime Minister with Auckland Issues Judith Tizard today welcomed transport funding body Transfund’s announcement that it will spend $320 million in the Auckland region in the coming year.

“That is part of a record $1.1 billion is to be spent on roading, passenger transport and other land transport projects nationwide in the new financial year,” said Judith Tizard, also Acting Minister for Transport. “This is the largest annual injection of funding ever made into land transport, and is the result of the major boost to land transport funding announced by the government earlier this year.

“This is great news for the country, and for the region. New roading projects likely to go ahead in the Auckland as a result of this funding in the next year include:

· improvements to Auckland’s central motorway junction, at a total cost of $156.5 million;  
·a second upper harbour bridge between Hobsonville and Greenhithe, at a total cost of nearly $41 million; and  
·construction of a new interchange at Esmonde Road ($28 million in total).

“Continued funding has also been committed for the $68 million Grafton Gully project and the grade separation of the State Highway 20/Puhinui Road intersection, to improve access to the airport.”

Nationwide, the increase in planned spending includes $348.6 million for new roading construction projects, up $34 million on last year’s allocation.

While roading continues to be the main focus for funding, Judith Tizard said nearly $31 million has been allocated to passenger transport services in the Auckland region this year, an increase of 38% since last year, and the amount available for alternatives to cars, such as passenger transport and cycling and walking is at an all time high.

“The government’s package of changes earlier this year promised a better balance of the land transport mix, funding more roading but also widening the mix to include these alternatives. The funding allocations today reflect that more balanced approach.”

Judith Tizard said the Labour-led government’s commitment to helping the Auckland region with its transport and growth issues is as strong as ever.

“As a government we support Auckland’s needs and we are committed to introducing land transport legislation as soon as possible after the election that will further improve land transport in Auckland and New Zealand.

“That legislation will take the land transport changes one step further, including allowing greater use of funding alternatives for financing major roading projects such as public-private partnerships.