---
title: "Questions and Answers re the Secondary Teachers Pay Negotiations"
date: 2002-06-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14316
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

When will negotiations begin?  
The Ministry and the PPTA are in discussion. Formal negotiations will begin when the PPTA has revised its claim and is in a position to commence negotiations again. The Ministry is ready to enter fresh negotiations at any time.

Will negotiations take place if there is strike action?  
Negotiations will not proceed when students are being sent home or not being taught their timetabled classes.

Will the election on July 27 affect negotiations?  
There are certain constitutional conventions that arise as a result of an election being called and Parliament being dissolved. It's not clear what, if any, effect, these will have on the negotiations because the Government’s negotiators can continue to bargain within their mandate. It is not possible for the Minister or the Ministry of Education to speculate on the effect of the announcement on the PPTA’s processes and decision-making.

Will teachers be offered individual agreements on 1 July?  
New employees will be offered individual agreements, as there will not be an applicable collective agreement in place to be offered to new employees.

What will be the impact on NCEA of further industrial action by teachers?  
Level 1 of NCEA is well underway – in fact many students have already completed assessment against a range of standards. Marked student work has been reported to NZQA for moderation and validation. Many schools have already had their assessment moderated against the national standard. The NCEA exam timetable is set and exams will occur.

Have teachers been given the support they need to implement NCEA?  
Professional development has been provided for all teachers. Four days have been provided to date and a further four days are planned, to support levels 2 and 3. Support is also available to schools from the School Support Services and NZQA.  
School Relationship Manager reports from 85 schools visited so far indicate that these schools are extremely well prepared for implementation.  
The marked student work sent in for moderation from schools has shown that teachers are professionally assessing to the national standard.  
The implementation of the NCEA is being closely monitored so that NZQA and the Ministry can work with principals and teachers to target further forms of support.

What were the elements of the settlement package rejected by teachers?  
The settlement package, agreed to by the PPTA executive and government negotiators, addressed key issues of workload, recruitment and retention that PPTA raised during negotiations. Key elements of the settlement were:

qA salary increase of 2% effective July 2001, 1.5% effective July 2002 and 2% effective July 2003.  
qThe establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Secondary Teacher Remuneration. The Taskforce will examine and report on secondary teacher remuneration and the impact on remuneration of secondary teacher supply, demand, qualifications, workload, curriculum delivery, qualifications and other directly related issues that arise and report by 31 July 2003.  
qAn additional allowance for the introduction phase of levels 1,2 and 3 of the National Certificate of Educational Achievement (NCEA). The allowance is $1,000 per annum from July 2002 increasing to $1,500 for the duration of the 2004 school year.  
qAn entitlement of 3 non-contact hours per week from 2002, increasing to 4 non-contact hours per week from 2004 and then schools should endeavour to provide 5 non-contact hours per week from 2005.  
qA statement of intent from the Minister of Education to fully implement the staffing improvements based on the recommendations of the Staffing Review Group by the start of the 2006 school year.  
qAn additional guaranteed two-and-a-half hours per week release time for second year beginning teachers.  
qA High Priority Teacher Supply Allowance of $2,500 per annum, payable to approximately 460 secondary teachers in schools identified as experiencing the greatest staffing difficulties

How much did that settlement cost the government?  
The settlement package was worth around $150 million.

What is the average salary for teachers?  
Average salaries are determined by the pay roll data – not the pay scale. They are real and actual figures based on what the teachers are paid, including their management units. The current average salary is $52,000 compared to $47,700 in March 1999 – an increase of 8 per cent. That does not include secondary school principals who are not part of the collective agreement. The latest settlement provided for an average further 7 percent increase between now and April 2004 when the agreement expired.

How is the Government addressing recruitment and retention issues?  
The Government has stated its intention to implement staffing improvements by the beginning of 2006. This year an additional 142 secondary teachers were in schools as the first step of the Government’s plan to add 1850 new teacher positions over the next five years. This is in addition to the extra teachers required because of roll growth.