---
title: "More national coaches gain elite scholarships"
date: 2002-06-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14314
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Sport and Recreation
---

Seven more Prime Minister’s Coach Scholarships have been awarded to support high performance coaches - making sure they get the recognition they deserve.

This is the second round of scholarships to be presented. They will help New Zealand’s elite coaches train and inspire potential sporting stars of the future.

Margaret Foster (netball), Andrew MacLennan (athletics) and Gerard Stokes (rugby league) received scholarships worth $50,000 each and four other coaches were awarded $10,000.

Sport, Fitness and Leisure Minister Trevor Mallard said fostering sporting excellence is a major part of the government’s policies.

“It’s inspiring to see seven more coaches recognised for their hard work and vision for the future. The scholarship review panel have high standards and some proposals put forward just weren’t up to that standard. The coaches receiving these awards should feel very proud of themselves.

"Coaches are too often unsung heroes, but they play a vital role in the success of our athletes and sports teams. As a nation, we benefit when our sporting stars do well. Supporting coaches is a way of enhancing the potential of top athletes.”

The Prime Minister’s Coach Scholarships were established following the Ministerial report into sport, fitness and leisure which identified the need for greater resources and support for coaches.

Aimed at providing professional development opportunities, the government has committed $1 million dollars to the programme this year.

“The scholarships offer the opportunity for sports and coaches to plan ahead - to identify professional development opportunities that will improve their ability and give them access to the support they need to get there.