---
title: "Minister announces new appointed DHB members and chairs"
date: 2002-06-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14393
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King today announced the appointment of five new board members to District Health Boards, a new chair of Waikato DHB, and the reappointment of the current chair of Tairawhiti DHB.

The appointments made today will fill the remaining board positions. The five new board appointments are:  
·Airini TukerangiCounties Manukau DHB  
·Mere BalzerWaikato DHB  
·Leaupepe Elisapeta KaralusWaikato DHB  
·Donald BlakeneyTairawhiti DHB  
·Glen KatuTaranaki DHB

A new chair for Waikato DHB has also been appointed. Michael Ludbrook will take over from retiring chair Ian Wilson. Ms King thanked Mr Wilson for his efforts as chair of Waikato DHB and said she looked forward to continuing to work with him as chair of MidCentral DHB.

Wayne Brown was elected to Tairawhiti DHB and subsequently appointed chair for a nine-month period. Despite his heavy commitments as chair of Auckland DHB, Mr Brown has agreed to a re-appointment and has therefore been reconfirmed as chair for the remainder of his term as an elected member.

A brief profile of each new board member and chairs is attached.

For more information, contact John Harvey (04) 471 9305.

Counties Manukau

Airini Tukerangi is of Ngati Tamatera iwi. She works as a consultant contracted to Tuwharetoa ki Kawerau Hauora and is Project Manager Special Education Services contracted to Te Whanau O Waipereira Trust. Her background is in psychiatric nursing. She has worked on Mâori health initiatives for a number of organisations, including Auckland Regional Health Authority and Te Whanau O Waipareira Trust.

Waikato

Michael Ludbrook is a current board member of Waikato DHB. He is a management consultant with a strong background on health, including time as Chief Executive Officer of Western Bay Health. Mr Ludbrook also has comprehensive experience in leadership and strategic planning.

Mere Balzer is of Te Arawa/Ngati Ranginui/Ngati Raukawa iwi. She is CEO of Te Runanga o Kirikiroa Trust Inc. and director of Aamuri Connections. Mrs Balzer has a Masters degree in Social Sciences and has had management experience in the education sector. She is a Foundation Fellow of the College of Nurses NZ/Aotearoa, and was a mental health/psychopaedic nurse.

Leaupepe Elisapeta Karalus has previously been on the board of Waikato DHB. Mrs Karalus is of Samoan heritage and is CEO of K’aute Pasifika, a charitable organisation providing health, educational and social services in the Waikato region. Her background is in nursing and health policy, and she has worked in nursing practice, management and education.

Tairawhiti

Donald Blakeney is a self-employed business advisor currently resident in Tolaga Bay. He has been involved in assisting small businesses and people trying to establish enterprises to promote sustainable income and jobs.

Wayne Brown has extensive governance, financial management and health sector skills and experience. Mr Brown is also the current chair of Auckland DHB.

Taranaki

Glen Katu is of Ngati Maniapoto/Ngati Ruanui iwi. He is Managing Director of Kadu Consultants Limited, a company providing business planning and training services in the Taranaki region. He has worked in the banking industry for 27 years. He is currently financial advisor to Ngati Ruanui Muru Me Te Raupatu Working Party (Hawera) and a director of Ngati Ruanui Group Management Ltd (Hawera). Mr Katu is actively involved in supporting business development in the Taranaki region.