---
title: "Modern Apprenticeships in tourism"
date: 2002-06-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14261
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

12 June 2002Media statement

Tourism Minister Mark Burton says the expansion of the Modern Apprenticeship scheme to the tourism sector will bring significant benefits, to both the apprentice and the industry in which they work.

Mark Burton signed up the first tourism Modern Apprenticeship at a launch in Wellington this morning. 16 year old Vanessa Zietsman works for Skyline Enterprises in Queenstown and will complete national certificate papers in tourism and travel.

"We will be contracting for at least 82 Modern Apprentices nationwide in the tourism industry by June next year," Mark Burton said.

"The Modern Apprenticeship scheme is a key component of Labour's comprehensive employment and skills strategy. Although New Zealand has had a proud history of apprenticeships for young people, the system had fallen into a state of some disrepair under National governments.

"The Labour-led government recognised the valuable contribution that apprenticeships can make to both the personal and career development of our youth. That's why we initiated a new scheme that made apprenticeships attractive not only to the apprentice, but to the employer as well.

"Co-ordinators are appointed, to provide ongoing mentoring, training support and problem solving advice to apprentices. As a result, the costs and risks to employers of training young apprentices have been reduced and the number of people gaining access to apprenticeships increased.

"The tourism apprentice will gain a pathway into a great industry full of opportunities. The tourism industry will gain the enthusiasm and fresh perspectives of young workers, as well as an improvement in the general skills and knowledge base of the industry. The Modern Apprenticeships scheme really does create a win-win situation.

"It also fits into the overall direction for the tourism industry set out by the New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010. The Strategy, which was prepared by the government in conjunction with a range of industry stakeholders, identified a skilled workforce as a key to the success of New Zealand tourism."

Skills New Zealand has contracted the Aviation, Tourism and Travel Training Organisation to provide the Modern Apprenticeship Co-ordination Services for Tourism. The Regent Training Centre in Northland, Christchurch Polytech and Smart Careers in Nelson are also closely involved.

"Each new modern apprenticeship is a personal success story – a statement of an individual young person’s commitment to their training, and of their employers commitment to them, the enterprise they are working in, and the New Zealand economy.

"I believe the Modern Apprenticeships scheme will bring many of these personal success stories to the tourism industry," Mark Burton said.