---
title: "Tararua social entrepreneur project launched"
date: 2002-06-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14385
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey and local MPs Parekura Horomia and Georgina Beyer were in Dannevirke this morning to mark Rangitäne o Tamaki nui a Rua joining the government’s social entrepreneurship programme.

The launch was attended by local mayors and iwi members from the Tararua area. Rangitäne o Tamaki nui a Rua provides health, mental health, education and welfare services to the district. It will gain an additional $55,000 per annum for the next three years in social entrepreneurship funding from the Department of Internal Affairs.

Steve Maharey said Rangitäne o Tamaki nui a Rua has demonstrated a strong track record in serving people living in the Tararua district and the government wants to work in partnership with them to see its services improved and expanded.

“Strong community-based social services are the ‘glue’ that helps build the social, cultural and economic development of any district. In Tararua Rangitäne o Tamaki nui a Rua has been operating for 13 years offering essential services like asthma education, drug and alcohol counselling, budgeting services and an alternative education centre for children alienated from the education system.

“The government’s social entrepreneurs programme was established last year to back the ‘movers and shakers’ in communities across New Zealand. Social entrepreneurs use the same degree of enterprise and imagination as business entrepreneurs to develop initiatives to solve social problems and do good in their communities.

“The project we have signed up to with Rangitäne o Tamaki nui a Rua will enable them to employ two new 23 hour per week social entrepreneurs. One will be based in the Norswood, Herbertville and Dannevirke communities, while the other person will work in Woodville, Pahiatua, Pongaroa and Eketahuna.  
. . / 2  
“The new staff will work primarily on improving and publicising existing services offered to young people in the district. Examples of programmes they intend working with include Pahiatua’s One Stop Shop; Dannevirke’s Friday Night Youth Centre; The Edge in Woodville; skate board projects in Dannevirke, Woodville and Pahiatua; church youth groups and local scouts, guides and badgers.

“Community hui and surveys have indicated that locals have a limited knowledge about current community services for young people and that services are not well used by Maori youth in particular. The two new social entrepreneurs will work closely with the community to promote and improve programmes, identify and fill gaps in exisiting services and strengthen links with local councils and business,” Steve Maharey said.