---
title: "Minister to consider best way forward to resolve PPTA settlement"
date: 2002-06-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14225
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said today that he was disappointed that PPTA members had voted against the settlement agreed to by their negotiators.

“Given the speculation that has come from regional meetings in the last two weeks, today’s announcement is not a big surprise,” Trevor Mallard said.

Trevor Mallard said the government’s main immediate priority was to work with teachers and the PPTA to ensure that students’ education was not disrupted.

“The 12 month post-expiry date for the current collective agreement is up at the end of the month. I have, however, told the PPTA that the government is willing to agree to a further rollover while we attempt to reach a new agreement.

“This is important to ensure that members’ collective interests are protected beyond 1 July while further work is undertaken to reach agreement.

“As a matter of good faith, the government will also offer to set up the Ministerial taskforce that was part of the settlement package. This was an aspect of the settlement that was well received by teachers and we need to get on with the work. There is no point in holding it up. The taskforce will consider issues like workload, recruitment and retention.

“The government is also committed to re-entering negotiations. My priority is to get a fair settlement – one that values teachers and lifts the quality of education in our secondary schools,” Trevor Mallard said.