---
title: "Site identified for new Otago prison"
date: 2002-06-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14304
ministers:
  - Matt Robson
portfolios:
  - Corrections
---

A site at Milburn, thirty-five minutes out of Dunedin has been identified as the strongest option yet for the new $100 million Otago Region Corrections Facility, Corrections Minister Matt Robson announced today.

The new 330-inmate regional prison will replace the old-style 59-inmate Victorian jail in Dunedin, which Matt Robson earmarked for closure last year.

“Regional prisons ensure that offenders serve their time in their own area, close to family and support groups. We know this helps reduce re-offending, says Matt Robson.

“The new prison will also incorporate the best, most effective programs aimed at reducing re-offending.

“The government’s tougher stance on sentencing and parole will mean more inmates, which means we need more prison capacity,” says Matt Robson.

Further investigation of the site, and consultation with the local community will now take place. The Department considered more than 40 sites. The site search was extended and took longer than expected to enable a thorough examination of all possible sites.

“Milburn site was the only one left standing at the end of the day.”

The site has many benefits, including enough room to build a low-rise, modern facility. The new prison will create 190 permanent jobs and pump $8.5 million each year into the local economy.

There will be no final decision until a detailed investigation of the site has occurred, and local people, tangata whenua, site neighbours, councils and other interested parties have been consulted.

“I will review the results of this consultation process and make a decision later this year based on all the information before me,” says Matt Robson.

Media Enquiries: Josie Harbutt \[press secretary] 021 588 860, 04 470 6676 or Barry Ebert \[press secretary] 04 471 9931 or 021 636416 Check out www.beehive.govt.nz and www.robsononline.co.nz