---
title: "Murray McCully speaks for Maori Members of National Party"
date: 2002-06-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14370
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Maori Affairs
---

Maori Affairs Minister Parekura Horomia was shocked to discover that the National Party seems to have made Murray McCully the new Maori Affairs spokesperson.

"Murray McCully's attacks on whanau, hapu, iwi and Maori community development are appalling. Why has Hon Georgina Te Heuheu been excused from her role as Maori Affairs spokesperson, when she was only promoted to the front bench in October 2001.

"This type of National Party attitude exposed in Murray McCully's comments today are typical of a political party that has no commitment to get serious about Maori development and is also unwilling to let their Maori members speak for themselves.

"What do Georgina and Hekia think of Murray McCully attacking the development of whanau within their own communities.

"The Capacity Building fund, is part of the Maori development funding available to acccelerate whanau, hapu, iwi and Maori communities development aspirations.

"All projects go through a process of scrutiny throughout the development and delivery of the initiatives. The positive impact of these initiatives are obvious in the communities around the country. If Murray McCully had visited Maori communities he would have been aware of this.

"I will not apologise for taking Maori development seriously and keeping the promises Labour made to the electorate, on becoming government.

"To achieve our full potential as a nation, all members of our society must fully particpate in their own development," Parekura Horomia said.