---
title: "Second Film Production Fund film in pre-production"
date: 2002-06-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14202
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

Acting Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage Judith Tizard today welcomed the commencement of production of another New Zealand feature film, Perfect Strangers. This is the second film project to receive financial support from the New Zealand Film Production Fund.

Perfect Strangers is a romantic thriller produced by Gaylene Preston Productions in association with Huntaway Productions. Pre-production for the film - written, directed and produced by Gaylene Preston (War Stories Our Mothers Never Told Us), produced by Robin Laing, and associate produced by Jay Cassells - has commenced on the West Coast. Sam Neill and Rachael Blake play the film’s leading roles.

The Film Production Fund was established in 2000 to support the production of larger-scale New Zealand films. The government contributed $22 million toward the Fund’s establishment.

Perfect Strangers was developed with assistance from the New Zealand Film Commission.

Judith Tizard said the announcement was another boost for the film industry, following on from the Film Production Fund’s first investment Whale Rider, currently in post-production.

“The local film industry plays an increasing economic and cultural role in New Zealand. It’s important for both the government and private enterprise to support its growth and vibrancy through ventures like Perfect Strangers.

“The Film Production Fund is designed to help create jobs for New Zealand writers, actors and production staff and maintain our place in the international film industry’s spotlight.”

New Zealand-made feature films, made by filmmakers who have already made at least one feature and with significant New Zealand content, are eligible for New Zealand Film Production Fund support.

Perfect Strangers will largely be shot on the South Island’s West Coast and post-production will be completed in Wellington.