---
title: "The green face of New Zealand"
date: 2002-06-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14199
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Environment Minister Marian Hobbs has marked World Environment Day by announcing the winners of the 2002 Green Ribbon awards. The Awards were introduced in 1990 to recognise people, community organisations and businesses enhancing our environment.

"I am continually impressed by the work that is going on quietly around New Zealand where people and organisations are making a very real and positive impact on the ground," Marian Hobbs said. "In many cases projects have been underway for years and are showing tangible results.

"I can't think of a better time to celebrate the hard work and effort of many New Zealanders working to improve their surroundings than World Environment Day."  
The 2002 Green Ribbon Award winners are:  
·Caring for the rural environment (joint winners) – Whaingaroa Harbour Care Inc, (Raglan), for encouraging riparian planting and improving water care and the Milnthorpe Park Society (Golden Bay) for management and replanting of a low fertility land block over almost 30 years.

·Caring for the urban environment (joint winners) – Innovative Waste Kaikoura for reducing Kaikoura landfill waste, recycling and eco-employment initiatives and Friends of the Whau (Waitakere City) for restoring the Whau, a suburban river in west Auckland.

·Caring for our biodiversity – Geoff Wightman of Waimate North Landcare Group (Northland) for promoting biodiversity to farmers and the community in the Waimate area, possum control and forest revegetation.  
·Raising awareness of environmental issues – Ecostore founder Malcolm Rands (Auckland) for assisting businesses become more environmentally friendly, for the Growing Organic Kids initiative with schools and for awareness projects such as the ‘Ecoman’ slot on TV One's Good Morning Show.

·Business caring for the Environment – Weyerhaeuser New Zealand Ltd. (Nelson), for implementing three key projects to reduce impacts on the environment - the Baigent Low Level Crossing Bridge, the Granite Environmental Management Plan and a Stream Classification Management System.

·State of the environment reporting – Environment BOP (Bay of Plenty), for its dynamic and clear 'State of the Bay of Plenty Environment 2001' report.

·Kids who care – Hastings Central School (Hawkes Bay), for its range of environmental activities, including "Eco-kids", a pilot school for environmental education, establishing an educational walkway, native tree planting and recycling projects.

The Minister also made special mention of three nominations achieving excellent results:  
·Beverly Kingston (Marlborough)  
·Trees for Canterbury  
·Kamo High School (Northland)

The Green Ribbon Awards will be presented at the 2002 Field Days on June 13.

In the past 12 years, 38 individuals, businesses, voluntary organisations, schools and councils from all over New Zealand have been honoured with Green Ribbon Awards. This year’s winners bring the number to 46.