---
title: "Prebble's crime statistics demonstrably false and deliberately misleading"
date: 2002-06-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14317
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Justice
---

Statistics used by ACT on crime are spectacularly dishonest and deliberately misleading, says Justice Minister Phil Goff.

“Claims by Richard Prebble at Act’s campaign launch yesterday are demonstrably false. His statement that ‘you are more likely to be the victim of a violent crime, an assault, a robbery, a home invasion or a rape in New Zealand than in the United States’ could not be more wrong and Mr Prebble knows it.

“The latest statistics made available to me by the Ministry of Justice show America had a rate of violent crime almost four times that of New Zealand.

“The US in the year 2000 had more than double the rate of rape per head of population than New Zealand, more than three times the rate of murder and robbery and over four times the rate of aggravated assault.

“His claim that we have the highest rate of violent crime in the OECD is equally false. Of the English speaking countries, which I have had researched, violent crime was 44 percent lower in New Zealand than in Canada and 13 percent lower than in England or Wales per head of population.

“Mr Prebble’s statement that ‘There are days when the murder rate exceeds the road toll’ similarly is designed to mislead.

“There were 53 murders in New Zealand last year while 394 people were killed in road accidents.

“Law and order is an important issue in this election campaign. Mr Prebble, however, will only damage his own credibility by making claims which can easily be demonstrated as being false, and which Mr Prebble himself knows to be false,” Mr Goff said.