---
title: "Minister welcomes proposed changes for older drivers"
date: 2002-06-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14222
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Senior Citizens
---

Proposed changes giving older drivers the choice of sitting an older driver test or a new conditional licence test have been welcomed by Senior Citizens Minister Lianne Dalziel.

Acting Transport Minister Judith Tizard today announced the planned changes which include the new option of a conditional licence, allowing older people to drive in speed limit areas of up to 80km/hr.

“As an advocate within Cabinet for older people, I have been well aware of the concerns older drivers have had about driver licensing provisions. We have already managed to achieve lower licensing costs for older drivers and today’s announcement is the next phase which many senior citizen organisations have been waiting for,” Lianne Dalziel said.

“Many members of senior citizen groups including Grey Power, have described their frustration at not having direct access to a conditional licence. Many older drivers prefer to avoid open highways and don’t want to travel long distances, but wish to retain the freedom of driving in their local communities to run errands such as grocery shopping or picking up grandchildren.

“This is excellent news for the many people who have not wanted to go through the process of a failing a full licence test before being able to sit a conditional licence test.

“I certainly encourage all Grey Power groups, senior citizen organisations and older drivers to take advantage of this public consultation process and to make submissions,” Lianne Dalziel said.

Submissions on the proposed changes close on August 2 and the proposals can be viewed on the LTSA website: www.ltsa.govt.nz/legislation or copies can be obtained by ringing 0800 699 000.