---
title: "Jim Anderton welcomes new Christchurch research facility"
date: 2002-06-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14247
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Minister for Economic Development Jim Anderton congratulated the Canterbury Development Corporation (CDC) today for their successful bid to bring Apple Computer’s Ultralab to Christchurch.

The parent Ultralab is based in Britain, and its team leads the world in proof of concept Educational Information Technology research. The new Christchurch facility will be only the second Ultralab in the world.

Jim Anderton praised Apple’s decision to locate in Christchurch. “The choice to locate here proves what I always knew was true. New Zealand is an ideal place for world-class research and development facitilies.

“We are privileged that top institutions recognise Christchurch’s emerging reputation for embracing cutting-edge technology.”

The Ultralab is the latest in a series of research facilities to opt for a South Island location. It’s announcement follows close on the heels of Canterbury University’s Human Interface Technology (HIT) Lab, which will open officially early next year. Both facilities see partnership with business as an essential component to their success.

“The Ultralab and the HIT Lab are both prime examples of the possibilities that can be brought about through innovative partnerships.”

Jim Anderton also praised the CDC for the two years of hard work which has led to the region’s technological boom.

“Canterbury is taking the lead in this area, and Christchurch is becoming the Silicon Valley of the South Pacific.”