---
title: "Further boost for Pacific early childhood education"
date: 2002-06-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14421
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The government is contributing nearly $1 million to help fund three new Pasifika education and care centres on land next to the Mangere Pacific Island Congregational (PIC) church.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard met with the communities today to announce the funding for the project that will provide 120 new places in licensed and chartered early childhood centres for Pasifika children.

Currently, there are three community groups who each run their own playgroup in the church buildings.

ØFiti Lagakali Aoga Niue (Niuean);  
ØA'oga Fa'ata'ita'i Samoa (Samoan); and  
ØTe Reo Kuki Airani (Cook Islands).  
The new centres will all be grouped together under one roof, each will have its own centre and activity space. The three centres will share an office, staff room and entrance foyer.

The government is contributing $994,188 through the Pacific pool of the early childhood education Discretionary Grants Scheme. The funding is from an extra $5m set aside by the Government earlier this year for groups who were unsuccessful in the latest allocation round and is additional to the $2.75m already allocated this financial year by the Pacific pool.

The 120 new licensed places brings the number of new places funded this year from the Pacific pool to 464.

“The government is committed to quality access to early childhood education for all New Zealanders,” Trevor Mallard said.

“Helping communities establish top quality facilities is a major part of that. This is a particularly exciting example the sharing arrangement allows the three new centres to support each other and easily share resources.”

To assist these new groups in their establishment and to also help existing Pasifika and community based Education and Care Centres, the Minister also released a new resource.

Te Au Kite Pu'apinga: Useful Resources has been asked for by Pasifika centres during the last two years as an outcome of the Strengthening Pasifika Early Childhood Education Fono.

The Cook Islands Mäori title was sought from the elders of the Cook Islands community across the country. "Useful resources" is the translation of "Te Au Kite Pu'apinga".  
Topics covered in Te Au Kite Pu'apinga: Useful Resources include; employment issues; financial management; administration; health and safety; business and mentoring, early childhood education resources and organisations etc.  
As well as showing what resources are available, Te Au Kite Pu'apinga: Useful Resources also has details on why each resource is useful, where it can be obtained from and whether there is any cost involved.  
Te Au Kite Pu'apinga: Useful Resources is intended to be used by Pasifika centres to help build their capability in quality management and administration practices, enabling quality early learning programmes for children to be provided.