---
title: "$68,000 awarded to Nelson Enterprise Loan Trust"
date: 2002-06-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14389
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton today announced nearly $68,000 to help fund the Nelson Enterprise Loan Trust’s (NELT) plans to become financially self-sufficient.

NELT is a local iniative that provides seed finance to new and emerging businesses in the Nelson/Tasman area that lack sufficient capital or equity to qualify for traditional financial backing.

By increasing the pool of money it has to lend out, NELT will be able to expand their operation and become self-sufficient.

NELT is funded through grants, donations and interest on loan capital. It has also attracted sponsorship from bodies such as the Tindall Foundation, the McKee Trust, Sir Pat Goodman, local government bodies, Community Trust and the Community Employment Group.

Jim Anderton announced the funding this afternoon in Nelson, and was impressed by NELT’s commitment to the region.

“This is an ideal example of government, private sector and local economic development agencies working together for the good of the region.

“Conventional banking systems have some serious gaps in the way they operate. They are risk averse. For too long, these have blocked regional development from going ahead.

“NELT has provided one very good means of tackling that problem.”

A survey of NELT was recently carried out by an Open Polytechnic business student, and the results were extremely positive.

The survey concluded that in only three years, NELT had invested $37,000 into the region. This has resulted in a regional return of $747,000 of goods, services and employment.

This translates to a dividend of over $20 for every dollar of seed capital spent.

“This is a return most lending institutions could only dream of,” said Jim Anderton.

NELT is also at the forefront of ethical investment in New Zealand. It is committed to making investments that are socially and environmentally responsible. Jim Anderton made mention of this philosophy in his presentation speech.

“I applaud you for your commitment to New Zealand’s future and personally support such a stance.”

The funding comprises $67,710 to be spent over 2-3 years. It will be used to promote NELT to potential investors, publicise NELT’S work, and purchase banking software, IT improvements and new administration systems.