---
title: "FrontLine adds South Island link"
date: 2002-06-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14277
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Customs
---

Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton welcomed Customs’ newest partner in the innovative FrontLine programme today in Christchurch.

Cameron Air & Seafreight Ltd is the first South Island based freight forwarding company to join the FrontLine initiative.

FrontLine is a partnership programme that encourages businesses to work with Customs in trade, community development and enforcement.

Jim Anderton praised the mutually beneficial nature of the programme. “FrontLine gives Customs partners in protecting our borders while businesses get tailored deals that reduce red tape.

“By combining the resources of businesses, individuals, Government and the community, we can keep drugs and contraband out of New Zealand.

“FrontLine offers both businesses and Customs a win-win outcome, and that’s what partnership is all about.”

Cameron Air and Seafreight Managing Director Ron Cameron, and Customs Inspections and Client Service Manager Debbie Whiteside contracted to work together to combat smuggling and other illegal import and export activities.

“In practical terms, this will see Cameron Air and Seafreight staff working even more closely with Customs officers,” said Debbie Whiteside.

“Through FrontLine, Cameron Air and Seafreight is agreeing to provide us with extra eyes and ears. In return we’re offering training on the sort of risks we are fighting and how they can help.”

Cameron Air and Seafreight is the 12th partner in the Customs FrontLine programme.

Background information

Ron Cameron set up Cameron Air & Seafreight Ltd in Christchurch in 1987.

The company’s operations cover both import and export freight as well as offering a full range of Customs clearance services. It was one of the first companies to embrace the EDI entry clearance processes for both imports and exports.

FrontLine was launched in May 2001 and provides a framework for partnerships between Customs and individual businesses to:  
·Detect prohibited goods and illegal activity  
·Facilitate the movement of legitimate goods  
· Promote community development through International trade