---
title: "Defence Minister announces major tender"
date: 2002-06-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14399
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Defence
---

26 June 2002Media Statement

The process of acquiring new light operational vehicles for the New Zealand Army to replace the ageing Landrover fleet is now getting underway, Defence Minister Mark Burton announced today.

"Up to 321 vehicles will be acquired, and the Landrover fleet, which is well past its expected retirement date, will finally be replaced, as part of the Labour-led government's commitment to a long overdue modernisation of the New Zealand Defence Force."

Mark Burton said that following the failure of the original tender process, when no vehicle was fully compliant, he requested a careful reassessment of the army's requirements.

"The Ministry of Defence and the NZDF undertook a review of the numbers and the allocation of armoured and non-armoured types of vehicles. This review resulted in a reduction in the number of armoured/higher mobility vehicles that are needed and introduced the option of a general purpose vehicle.

"A separate requirement for “special operations” vehicles has also been accommodated in this tender. A further 13 vehicles have been added, taking the maximum number of vehicles to 321. The total requirements are for:  
Type A: Up to 60 high mobility, lightly armoured vehicles.  
Type B: Up to 139 high mobility, non-armoured vehicles.  
Type C: Up to 109 standard vehicles.  
Type D: 13 special operations vehicles.

"Industry has previously been canvassed on interest in supplying high mobility vehicles (Types A, B and D). Five potential suppliers who have demonstrated that their vehicles have the desired mobility characteristics are being invited this week to tender for these vehicles. There will be a worldwide open tender process for the general purpose military vehicle (Type C). Tender documentation will be released on Friday.

"The tender process should be completed by early next year and the Ministry of Defence will then submit to government its recommendations for acquisition. A Labour government will ensure that the long overdue investment in our defence force provides best value for money," Mark Burton said.