---
title: "India - Pakistan travel advisory"
date: 2002-06-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14188
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

New Zealand’s travel advisory to New Zealanders in India and Pakistan has been upgraded to strongly urge them to leave, and for New Zealanders to defer travel to these countries.

“This advisory reflects the concerns of New Zealand and the countries with whom it most closely cooperates about continued high tensions and unpredictability of outcomes,” says Foreign Minister Phil Goff.

“The situation is such that it could deteriorate suddenly and without warning. If commercial flights are cancelled there is no guarantee that the New Zealand Government will be in a position to arrange evacuation of New Zealand nationals.

“New Zealanders in India and Pakistan should take advantage of the opportunity to leave on commercial flights while these remain available. We strongly urge New Zealanders in contact with friends or family in either country to relay this message to them.

“Most dependants of New Zealand staff at the High Commission in New Delhi are departing this weekend. Only essential staff will remain to do what they can to assist New Zealanders.

“Australia, Britain and other countries are taking similar steps to advise their citizens to leave and are arranging for dependents of High Commission staff to depart.

“Our warning is precautionary. We still hope that international mediation will persuade both sides to draw back from the brink. Current indications are however that conflict may not be avoidable and there is a real danger that this could spiral out of control,” Mr Goff said.

NB: Check the Ministry of Foreign Affairs website for travel advisory updates at www.mft.govt.nz

Contact: John Tulloch (press secretary) 04 471 9794 or 021 278 7233.  
john.tulloch@parliament.govt.nz