---
title: "National plans will break the bank"
date: 2002-06-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14326
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The National Party’s plan to pay secondary teachers more than they’re claiming is a wild political ploy from a party with no expectation that they will get into government, Education Minister Trevor Mallard said today.

“Anyone with any degree of intelligence will see this as an empty campaign promise from a no-hope party,” Trevor Mallard said.

“The PPTA’s latest proposed claim is about 9.5%. The plan outlined by Bill English this morning would mean pay rises in excess of 11.3 per cent. It would cost $60 million more than the May settlement between the PPTA and the Ministry, over a two-year period.

“Teachers might like pay rises that high – but most will see it for the empty promise that it is. They will also not like Bill English’s threats of performance-based pay, individual contracts and a return to the divisive bulk funding system.

“With National’s tax cut promises there is no way they could fund this without severe cuts to other areas of education spending or a tax increase. Other than a vague swipe at pay parity for kindergarten teachers – which, at $9 million for the two years, would come nowhere near covering the bill – National is not saying what they will cut.

“Much of Labour’s success in both campaigning and in government is based around our underpinning principle that we don’t promise what we can’t deliver. We have kept our word in government and we will continue to do that,” Trevor Mallard said.

Trevor Mallard said government negotiators were expecting the PPTA to table a new claim later this week and that negotiations could start as early as Friday. Information being circulated to PPTA members this week was a proposed claim by the union, not a deal agreed to by the government.