---
title: "Govt chips in to boost Tauranga and national economy"
date: 2002-06-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14204
ministers:
  - Michael Cullen
portfolios:
  - Finance
---

4 June 2002Media Statement  
Govt chips in to boost Tauranga and NZ economy

Finance Minister Michael Cullen and Tauranga based MP Margaret Wilson today announced that the government will contribute $200,000 to help Tauranga host a stopover in the 2002 Around Alone yacht race.

“Much of the credit for the decision belongs to Margaret who – on this issue as on many others – has been a tireless advocate within the government for Tauranga,” Dr Cullen said.

The money had been drawn from a special $9 million fund set up by the government last year to use the platforms created by the Lord of the Rings trilogy and the Americas Cup challenge to promote New Zealand overseas.

“The Around Alone race provides another great opportunity to showcase New Zealand abroad and the government is proud to be involved. We believe the government should work in partnership with the private sector to promote the country’s economic interests.

“Tauranga Around Alone Ltd, the company formed by local businesspeople to bid for the event, saw its potential for both the regional and the national economy and bid for it successfully against competing bids from Wellington, Melbourne and Sydney.

“They are to be congratulated for their initiative and I wish them every success,” Dr Cullen and Ms Wilson said.

The race starts in New York on 15 September. Tauranga is the third stopover after Torquay and Capetown. It is expected that the first boat will arrive in Tauranga shortly after Christmas and that the fleet will set sail for Salvador on 26 January.

Contact: Patricia Herbert \[press secretary] 04-471-9412 or 021-270-9013. E-mail: patricia.herbert@parliament.govt.nz