---
title: "Report released on 1998 collapse of Kenson Industries Wainuiomata"
date: 2002-03-13
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14673
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Hutt South MP Trevor Mallard welcomed a Commerce Committee report that says the government’s current review of insolvency laws addresses many of the issues raised after the collapse of a local Wainuiomata company.

On 28 August 1998 Kenson Industries Wainuiomata was put into voluntary liquidation along with the Auckland, Nelson and parent companies. About 100 staff lost jobs at the Wainuiomata–based seat manufacturer.

“Losing their jobs was incredibly difficult for the employees and their families.  
Soon after the collapse I met with ex-employees, several of whom faced severe hardship, to discuss the role of Income Support and Food Banks in assisting them. It was particularly stressful for the ex-employees as it seemed unlikely at that stage that they would receive redundancy payments,” Trevor Mallard said.

99 Wainuiomata staff received late redundancy payouts in December 1998.

Robert Burke and 2774 others petitioned the House of Representatives in early 1999 to investigate the circumstances surrounding the collapse of Kenson Industries Wainuiomata and change insolvency laws to protect employee’s rights.

The Commerce Committee reported back that they had sympathy with the concerns of the petitioners and noted the difficulties that they encountered.

The concerns of the petitioners have been referred to the Ministry of Economic Development which is currently undertaking the review.

“The collapse of Kenson Industries Wainuiomata was a devastating blow to the Kenson Industries employees, their families, and indeed the whole Valley. I am pleased to note that the concerns of petitioners are being addressed,” Trevor Mallard said.