---
title: "Government’s primary health care funding package a welcome boost"
date: 2002-03-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/14674
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Hutt South MP Trevor Mallard has welcomed the announcement that the cost of accessing primary health care will be reduced for at least 300,000 New Zealanders by the end of 2003.

In total the Government will spend an extra $410 million on primary health care over the next three years.

“This announcement is the most important development in caring for the health of New Zealanders since the first Labour Government introduced patient subsidies in the 1940s.

“I know first hand that health practitioners in the Hutt have been keen to learn the details of the Government’s Primary Health Care Strategy. The Government is committed over time to moving to a system where everyone gets affordable access to primary health care.

$50 million was allocated to begin implementing the Primary Health Care Strategy in the 2002/2003 year, rising to $165 million in 2003/2004, and $195 million in 2004/2005.

The new funding will be targeted firstly at low-income people with high health needs.

“As more funding becomes available from 2003/04, it will start to be applied to extend free or low cost access to primary health care services through Primary Health Organisations. The priorities will be reducing costs for school-age children followed by the elderly and others with high health needs, ” Trevor Mallard said.

The general medical services subsidy has also been increased from $32.50 to $35 for all GP services to children under six to adjust for inflation since the subsidy was introduced in 1997.