---
title: "Winners of Defence Industry Awards announced"
date: 2018-11-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/winners-defence-industry-awards-announced
ministers:
  - Hon Ron Mark
portfolios:
  - Defence
---

The Minister of Defence Industry Awards of Excellence for 2018 were presented in Palmerston North last night.

Minister of Defence Ron Mark says the winners and nominees represent companies which support the New Zealand Defence Force’s ability to continuously operate at the high standard the Coalition Government expects.

“The annual awards are an opportunity to recognise industry’s significant contributions to Defence and, as in previous years, the calibre of nominations was very strong,” says Ron Mark.

“The Defence industry sector employs around 2,500 people throughout New Zealand, generating $125 million in wages, and $60 million in profit, with industry hubs located in main centres as well as in Whangarei, Hamilton, the Manawatu, Blenheim and Nelson.

“The Coalition Government recognises the value which is generated by the industry and we are looking to see increased economic benefit delivered throughout the country from this sector.  This is particularly important with the current Coalition Government already having committed to $2.8 billion in Defence capital investment in its first year.

“It was an honour to congratulate the winners and finalists across all the categories, and acknowledge the nominees who have earned the respect of those who put them forward for these awards,” says Ron Mark.

Nominations covered some of the wide range of services and products that support Defence, including helicopter engines, hydraulics, diving equipment and systems, strategic planning and delivery.

The category winners are:

- Provision of a service to Defence less than $15 million: Beca and PricewaterhouseCoopers for their work on the Strategy 2025 refresh that resulted in the plan to implement the strategic changes needed within the Defence Force to overcome future challenges.
- Provision of a product to Defence less than $15 million: Draeger New Zealand Limited for the Royal New Zealand Navy’s Very Shallow Water Rebreather Project.
- Provision of a product or service to Defence in excess of $15 million: The Boeing Company, Airbus New Zealand Ltd, Beca, and Marops, which has seen a total airborne underwater intelligence solution delivered for the Air Force’s P-3K2 fleet.
- Health and Safety Citation: Beca for delivery of a system and tool to the Royal New Zealand Navy to provide assurance of management and maintenance of diving equipment.
- Special Award: Llanwyn Smith (Beca) for his significant and long-term contribution to the relationship between Defence and industry, including involvement with the P-3K2 Orion fleet that spans its establishment and evolving development.
- Special Award: Karen Tregaskis (Tregaskis Brown) for her role in transforming the joint Defence Capability Management System, enabling delivery of significant new and upgraded capability for the New Zealand Defence Force.

The speech by the Minister of Defence to the 2018 New Zealand Defence Industry Association Forum can be found here: [https://www.beehive.govt.nz/speech/speech-2018-new-zealand-defence-industry-association-forum](https://www.beehive.govt.nz/speech/speech-2018-new-zealand-defence-industry-association-forum)

The award citations are on the Ministry of Defence website here:

[https://defence.govt.nz/industry-working-with-defence/2018-awards-of-excellence-to-industry/](https://defence.govt.nz/industry-working-with-defence/2018-awards-of-excellence-to-industry/)