---
title: "TransTasman scientists study livestock methane"
date: 2008-02-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/transtasman-scientists-study-livestock-methane
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Research, Science and Technology
---

New Zealand and Australian scientists will jointly investigate ways of reducing the impact of livestock methane emissions by finding out more about the digestive processes in the rumen of livestock, Research, Science and Technology Minister Pete Hodgson said today.

The first ever collaborative project between the Livestock Industries Division of Australia's national science agency, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Livestock Industries (CLI) and New Zealand’s biggest Crown Research Institute, AgResearch, will jointly fund the research which will see the appointment of two new post-doctoral scientists, one in each organisation.

“The Labour-led government recognises that research and innovation go hand in hand, but research also requires investment. The revenue generated by the nine Crown Research Institutes is of the magnitude of $600 million.

“Any scientific breakthrough in methane emissions area would yield a very large return indeed. Understanding more about methane production in ruminants needs to be a top priority for pastoral sector R&D providers in New Zealand and Australia.

“The key to this research is to better understand the digestive processes of livestock and gain more efficiency in their nutrition thereby reducing greenhouse gas emissions of methane and nitrous oxide. I am very supportive of this work,” said Pete Hodgson.

CLI and AgResearch are providing funding to support the two post-doctoral scientists for two years, including funding to facilitate communication and travel between the two research teams.

http://www.agresearch.co.nz/ournews.asp