---
title: "Cruising to a bright future"
date: 2001-07-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/cruising-bright-future
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The Minister of Tourism Mark Burton says new research confirms the rapidly growing importance to the New Zealand economy of the cruise ship industry.

"The economic impact this summer is expected to exceed $600 million", Mark Burton said.

McDermott Fairgray is completing a comprehensive report for Cruise New Zealand, on the economic impact of cruise ship visits. (Cruise New Zealand promotes New Zealand as a cruise ship destination and has members from Tourism New Zealand, regional tourism organisations, inbound tour operators, port companies and shipping agencies).

Headline figures from the report shows that last summer 32,227 passengers on 51 cruises came to New Zealand. The passengers and crew directly spent $91 million while they were here. Total economic activity generated by cruise ship visits was $327 million.

"These figures, while impressive, will be far exceeded this coming summer," Mark Burton said.

"Cruise New Zealand is expecting a total of 64 cruises, bringing almost 49,000 passengers to our waters. The first cruise ship is due here in late November.

"The report estimates that direct expenditure will be $171 million. However, when a cruise vessel arrives in New Zealand, it begins a long chain of economic activity that stimulates employment and profits in many sectors of the economy.

"This summer the cruise industry is expected to generate a total economic impact of $612.6 million, and support more than 3000 full time equivalent jobs.

"The partnership approach embodied in Cruise New Zealand is reaping enormous benefits," Mark Burton said. "In a similar vein, a cross-government approach has been adopted to address issues with border agencies, and regional infrastructure.

"The Government will work closely with the private sector to ensure the tremendous growth in the cruise ship industry is sustainable and that it has a positive impact right around the country."