---
title: "Auckland reaps benefits from cruise ship industry"
date: 2001-07-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/auckland-reaps-benefits-cruise-ship-industry
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Auckland Issues
---

New research confirms the rapidly growing importance of the cruise ship industry to the Auckland economy, says Minister Assisting the Prime Minister with Auckland Issues, Judith Tizard.

Tourism Minister Mark Burton announced today that a soon-to-be-completed report on the cruise ship industry for Cruise New Zealand predicts the economic impact on New Zealand this summer will exceed $600 million.

"The report estimates that around 60% of the direct expenditure - over $100 million - is spent in Auckland," says Judith Tizard. "As well as being a stopover for almost every cruise ship, most connecting flights are in and out of Auckland Airport, and many of the ships' supplies are purchased in Auckland.

"The total economic activity generated by cruise ships will support an estimated 1900 full-time equivalent jobs in Auckland this summer.

"This is fantastic news for Auckland's growth, and I know that those attending the third and final Competitive Auckland forum tonight will be delighted with the figures.

"Tourism and food & beverage are two of the six key industries pinpointed by the Competitive Auckland strategy, and the cruise ship industry obviously has a huge role to play in these sectors in Auckland."

Judith Tizard has attended two sessions held by Cruise New Zealand over the last year, and says she is very impressed with the efforts they have made to attract more cruise ships to New Zealand.

"As most of the ships are in and out in one day, we need to ensure that the region's councils, businesses and tourist operators keep coordinating with Cruise New Zealand so that we get the repeat business.

"As the Associate Arts, Culture and Heritage Minister, I am also excited about the enormous opportunities the report's figures represent for creative industries and cultural tourism - a key focus of the Government's NZ Tourism Strategy."