---
title: "The Love Bug"
date: 2000-05-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/love-bug
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - State Services
---

State Services Minister Trevor Mallard said New Zealand government departments had fared well following the invasion of the Love Bug computer virus.

He said there was no abnormalities in most government departments and the few that had been affected were reporting no major after affects.

"The Ministry of Education seems to be the most affected of all government agencies and officials briefed me this morning. While the virus caused major disruptions to their operations on Friday, they can find no evidence of documents being deleted and order has now been restored.

"Other agencies which took precautionary measures are also back to normal. About five agencies closed their gateways at least temporarily while they worked on protecting themselves from the virus and preventing it being passed on if they did have it.

"Overall I am reasonably pleased with the way the New Zealand state sector coped with the virus. But I do have concerns that some agencies were slow in responding to SSC inquiries on this matter and a few did not respond until late this afternoon.

"We have an advantage in that viruses like the Love Bug and its mutants are more likely to start spreading in the middle of our night so we are protected by a bit of warning time.

"Government's role now is to establish procedures to make sure we utilise that protection. For example, this morning I discussed with Ministry of Education officials ways on which they could 'blitz' staff with information when there are major viruses circulating worldwide.

"I will also be investigating whether we need to set up a rapid response system within the state sector.

"I have not asked for a 'guesstimate' on how much the Love Bug has cost the state sector. I am more interested in using the experience of the last few days to make sure we keep on top of developments to prevent the spread of future viruses," Trevor Mallard said.