---
title: "Govt to secure spin-offs from <i>The Lord of the Rings</i> and America's Cup  regatta with $9 million funding package"
date: 2001-11-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/govt-secure-spin-offs-lord-rings-and-americas-cup-regatta-9-million-funding-package
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark announced today that the government will allocate up to $9 million in additional funding over the next two years on a range of projects aimed at capitalising on the forthcoming release of *The Lord of The Rings* trilogy and the staging of the next America's Cup regatta.

Speaking at Weta Workshop in Wellington this morning, Helen Clark outlined various initiatives which will maximise the spin-offs from *The Lord of The Rings* trilogy.

"In the first phase of these initiatives, focused on the premieres of the first film in the trilogy, *The Lord of The Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring*, $475,000 has been allocated by the Government. In total, the government and its agencies will be committing up to $4.5 million on further *The Lord of The Rings*-related projects over the next two years.

"With all three of the trilogy's films shot at a range of locations throughout New Zealand, *The Lord of The Rings* presents a unique opportunity to showcase our country to the world. There are significant and ongoing spin-offs for the tourism, computer software, film-making, wine and food, and dozens of other local industries.

"Details on the second round of funding, totalling $1.215 million, will be announced in the near future. A significant initiative involving Te Papa is being considered.

"The funding I have announced today is over and above funding already earmarked by a number of government agencies to *The Lord of The Rings* spin-offs. Tourism New Zealand has committed $1.64 million from the current financial year, and Trade New Zealand $155,000.

"In total, some $7 million has been allocated by government agencies in the current financial year on America's Cup defence and *The Lord of The Rings* spin-offs.

"Today's announcement is all about ensuring that this potential is realised, to the benefit of all New Zealanders.

"In the first round of funding, worth $475,000, six projects have been approved. Five of these will be co-ordinated by Trade New Zealand, and one by Industry New Zealand. They include:

- activities associated with the world premiere of *The Lord of The Rings*, in London and the New Zealand premiere in Wellington, and later first nights in Japan, Italy and Canada. These occasions will promote New Zealand as being the location for LOTR filming and post-production, and will offer New Zealand food and beverage;
- New Zealand supplements will be placed in the leading film trade magazines Variety, Hollywood Reporter and Screen International;  
  Overseas journalists will be hosted in New Zealand at the time of the film premieres and next year;
- Additional printing runs of maps identifying New Zealand as Home of Middle Earth, and manufacture of a unique set of distinctly New Zealand gift items which incorporate the LOTR theme. It is part of film industry tradition and custom for such gifts to be given in association with premieres;
- An Industry New Zealand-sponsored communications programme with local firms which are suppliers to, or could benefit from, the attention New Zealand is likely to receive following the release of the trilogy's first film on 10 December.

"As *The Lord of The Rings* saga unfolds, captivating audiences throughout the world, the government will maintain the momentum generated by these and other initiatives.

"A ministerial committee will assess proposals for funding against a range of criteria. For example, each event and activity must showcase the best of New Zealand and have benefit for our country. There must also be a clear linkage between the activity and New Zealand and the defence of the America's Cup and/or *The Lord of The Rings* trilogy.

"The government is determined that the enormous opportunities offered by the epic *The Lord of The Rings* project, along with New Zealand's second defence of the America's Cup, are not lost," Helen Clark said.

[See here](http://www.executive.govt.nz/pm/lor) for Q&A and facts sheets on *The Lord of The Rings*