---
title: "Tourism Boom and Growing Horizons"
date: 2004-12-15
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/tourism-boom-and-growing-horizons
ministers:
  - Dover Samuels
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The good news in the tourism industry just keeps rolling in!All the signals are positive for tourism in New Zealand, especially where our international perception is concerned. International visitor numbers grew in October 2004 by 9 per cent or by 181, 400 people. This growth is on top of an already impressive growth figure of 8.6 per cent in September 2004. The news can't really get much better, we are on target to reaching double digit growth.The staggering performance of the tourism industry is creating issues of the best kind. The tourism sector directly and indirectly supports one in eleven jobs. Indications from the Tourism Workforce and Skills Projections Report show that the growth of the tourism industry will lead to an additional 31,450 jobs by the year 2010 – an average of 4 ½ thousand per year. The government and industry associations are working hard to ensure we have human resource supply and capability into the future. This also means re-focussing on young people and to encourage them into a job that will become a career, tourism isn't a stopgap summer job. Operators are the bread and butter of the sector, they also need to play their part in ensuring that tourism is seen as viable career option and it's pleasing to see that many operators are investing into the future of their staff.We are putting in place industry-based skills training programmes to upskill our staff to ensure that operators have the capability to consistently deliver the high standards of quality service our visitors now expect from us. We have to support our operators into the international market and we have to find unique ways of showing ourselves off.There are so many opportunities for young Maori, especially in places like Northland and the East Coast where tourism is really starting to take off, this is the perfect time to enter the industry with a career in sight! The predicted boom summer is likely to become a reality for 2004/05 judging by the number of hits being received on a weekly basis by New Zealand Tourism Online. Average weekly hits to the site have averaged at around 40,000 per week but in recent months have peaked at 60,000.A lot more people want to get information on New Zealand and a lot more people are turning that into the purchasing of a holiday in New Zealand. This is fantastic news and is testament to the growing reputation that New Zealand is a holiday destination of choice, we have high quality products, internationally competitive pricing, extremely high standards of service, competent people and a huge range of activities.Maori cultural tourism products are our point of difference, we have known this for a long time but our reputation for authentic high-quality cultural tourism experiences is growing in leaps and bounds and we are also hitting the high end of the market."This news only cements the fact that New Zealand is becoming one of the hottest destinations on the planet.