---
title: "Government welcomes Maersk megaship"
date: 2016-10-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/government-welcomes-maersk-megaship
ministers:
  - Simon Bridges
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Transport Minister Simon Bridges has welcomed the arrival of the megaship *Aotea Maersk* in Tauranga, the biggest container ship to have ever visited New Zealand.

The 9500 twenty-foot equivalent units vessel offers exporters significant efficiency and environmental benefits.

“The *Aotea Maersk* can carry almost twice as much cargo as any other container ship that has previously docked in New Zealand, allowing us to become a more efficient export nation,” Mr Bridges says.

“Such large ships are a potential game changer for New Zealand businesses looking to export, allowing us to compete with countries that have big ships on their main trade routes.

“It will serve a new line between China, New Zealand and Chile, opening up new economic opportunities in Latin America. It will also offer a fast weekly direct service to important markets including China, Korea, Japan and Taiwan.”

Mr Bridges says the Government’s Roads of National Significance programme is strengthening the key strategic routes that will be used to transport freight to and from ports handling these megaships.

“We also continue to invest heavily in the rail network with over $4.2 billion spent in rail since coming into government.

“This foresight means our land transport network, including the ‘golden triangle’ between Tauranga, Waikato and Auckland, will be able to more effectively and safely manage the freight these massive ships will carry.

“Using larger, more efficient ships and reducing the number of vessels needed to shift freight is not only good business, it is good for the environment.

“The lower emissions per container generated by these vessels allow New Zealand exports to gain a relative carbon efficiency, compared to products from other competing markets,” Mr Bridges says.