---
title: "NEW ZEALAND'S SUCCESS DEPENDS ON ECONOMIC CREDIBILITY"
date: 1999-11-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/new-zealands-success-depends-economic-credibility
ministers:
  - Jenny Shipley
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

The 1999 election is a test of the credibility of the main parties' leaders, their teams and how their plans could lift the prosperity of New Zealanders, Prime Minister Jenny Shipley said today.

Mrs Shipley was launching the National Party's "next chapter" document which charts New Zealand's aims for the years ahead.

"National has laid out our track record and the concrete plans we have to take New Zealand from success to success.

"In every area outlined in this document, we've got a solid record of achievement - and plans that will open up opportunities for New Zealanders.

"The next chapter in the New Zealand story is about succeeding with innovative ideas and new technology - with new and old industries alike.

"It is also about fair welfare and modern health and education systems that allow New Zealanders to grasp the opportunities to get ahead.

"We've shown throughout the 1990s how this can be done. Economic growth generated by sound policies means the cake gets bigger for everyone, allowing us to invest in quality social spending, cut taxes and reduce debt.

"That is our path for the future.

"Labour, on the other hand, merely wants to tax more and spend more. They simply are not creating the conditions to get growth.

"I challenge them to say what promises they are going to keep and what promises they are going to drop. If they are promising more spending, how are they going to fund those promises? If they can't raise enough revenue from their tax increases, what promises don't they intend to keep? They can't have it both ways.

"New Zealanders must compare the positions of National and Labour and decide for themselves," Mrs Shipley said.