---
title: "50,000 homes warmed up - 138,500 to go"
date: 2010-07-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/50000-homes-warmed-138500-go
ministers:
  - Gerry Brownlee
portfolios:
  - Energy and Resources
attachments:
  - https://www.beehive.govt.nz/sites/default/files/Regional_Breakdown.pdf
---

Over 50,000 homes have been retrofitted under the government's *Warm Up New Zealand: Heat Smart* home insulation and heating programme, which kicked off one year ago today.

"This programme is helping make Kiwi homes warmer and healthier on a scale we have never seen before," Energy and Resources Minister Gerry Brownlee said.

"One year into the programme, we're well on track to meet our target of at least 188,500 homes insulated by 2013.

"Along with greater comfort and health benefits for occupants, the programme has also had a positive economic impact during difficult times," Mr Brownlee said.

"Around 2,000 new jobs are expected to be created as a result of the programme, and we are seeing good growth in the many businesses directly and indirectly involved."

The programme is the result of a Memorandum of Understanding between the National and Green Parties, which seeks to find areas of common ground where the parties can work together.

Mr Brownlee, along with Prime Minister John Key, and Green Party co-leader Dr Russel Norman, today visited Christchurch insulation manufacturer Terra Lana, whose natural wool insulation is used by many of the businesses delivering the programme.

"Terra Lana has invested in a second production line and taken on 15 extra employees, more than doubling its staff numbers, to meet increased demand generated by the insulation programme."

The Prime Minister met local couple Matt Allen and Miranda Harris, the owners of the 50,000th home to be retrofitted under the programme.  Their home has been insulated and a heat pump installed by Christchurch-based company Air Con New Zealand, creating a warmer, healthier living environment for them and their newborn baby.

Air Con New Zealand have seen a 30 - 35 per cent increase in business across their nationwide network of franchises since the programme started, and  have taken on more than 50 new employees to cope with the increasing workload.

*Warm Up New Zealand: Heat Smart* has also attracted around $13 million in additional funding in its first year from a range of community groups, health trusts and other organisations.

"I am delighted to see this extra funding help those people most in need, like those with a particular health issue, who can access the scheme for free, or at very little cost," Mr Brownlee said.

**Background**

Under the programme, funding is available to help insulate homes, and install clean and efficient heating.

The government has committed to spending $347 million over four years on the programme to improve at least 188,500 homes across New Zealand.  It is anticipated about 70,000 recipients of the scheme will be households on a low income (i.e. Community Service Card holders). 

Homeowners with houses built before 2000 are eligible for 33 per cent of the cost of installing ceiling and underfloor insulation, to a maximum of $1300.  Once insulation is up to standard, homeowners can get $500 towards a clean, efficient heating system.

There are higher levels of funding for Community Services Card holders.  For more information, visit [www.energywise.govt.nz](http://www.energywise.govt.nz/).