---
title: "Minister acknowledges"
date: 2001-04-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10201
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

The Minister of Conservation Sandra Lee, responding to the release of a report by the Maori Affairs Committee on Lake Omapere, said she understood the anguish of the Lake Omapere Maori Trustees as they watched their privately-owned lake degrade.

"The lake has suffered from years of poor environmental management of the lake surrounds and catchment, leaving it vulnerable to algal blooms."

Ms Lee noted that the Department of Conservation's period of involvement went back to the term of the previous Minister of Conservation, Nick Smith.

"The then-Minister did approve a release in 1997 subject to conditions to ensure the grass carp were effectively contained in Lake Omapere and that there was adequate monitoring in place; this was a large experimental release of an alien fish into an open water body."

Ms Lee said that there were considerable delays in responding to the department's proposed conditions by those acting for the Lake Omapere Trustees

"The conditions may seem unreasonable to the Lake's Trustees but the release of grass carp into New Zealand's waterways is not one that could or should proceed without thorough environmental scrutiny and effective containment procedures in place to prevent their escape. Environmental groups and some Maori have expressed concern about their impact on native freshwater plants and animals, " she said.

"Grass carp are large, relatively long lived fish. An attempt to remove them from a small Northland lake has already failed. There have been far too many disastrous introductions of alien species into New Zealand's natural environment, at horrendous cost to the taxpayers, for the release of grass carp to occur without careful consideration."

Ms Lee said the poor condition of Lake Omapere was due to the lowering of lake levels to facilitate farming of the lake margins, nutrient enrichment from farm development and the introduction of an aggressive South American oxygen weed.  
Ms Lee said her department would continue to offer technical support and advice to the Lake Trustees, the Northland Regional Council, the Minister for the Environment and others with an interest in the future of the lake.