---
title: "Government Launches New 'Social Enterprises' Initiative"
date: 2001-04-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10177
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey today announced details of the first group of social enterprises to be funded under the Community Employment Organisations (CEOs) programme.

The Government has allocated $8.5 million over three years to pilot the CEOs programme. CEOs are social enterprises in the community and voluntary sector undertaking commercial activity not in competition with the private sector to meets community needs and to create employment. A mix of advisory support and financial assistance from the Community Employment Group and wage subsidies from DWI are provided to assist CEOs.

Mr Maharey said that subsidised employment with a CEO provides a stepping stone to employment in the wider economy.

"CEOs give unemployed New Zealanders valuable employment experience and assists in overcoming barriers to employment.

"The programme sees job-seekers making the move into real jobs, earning real wages, and generating real self-belief and a sense of self-worth.

"The contrast with the previous National Government's and the ACT Party's preference for Community Work could not be clearer. That scheme created make-work jobs, encouraged dependency, and robbed individuals of any sense of self-worth.

"Six CEOs are currently in place with a further 6 proposals being assessed. A further 35 proposals are currently being developed with CEG field advisers.

"From energy efficiency measures designed to assist low income households to an initiative which provides low cost school lunches to children in low decile schools, CEOs demonstrate that it is possible to grow jobs, grow community capacity, and address fundamental community needs," Steve Maharey said.