---
title: "Work and Income briefing Qantas NZ staff on assistance"
date: 2001-04-25
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10362
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey said today he had asked Work and Income to ensure former Qantas New Zealand staff and other affected employees are aware of the assistance available to them from the Department.

People whose jobs have been affected by the closure of the airline can apply for a range of income assistance from DWI, including the Community Wage and other emergency financial assistance. Mr Maharey said DWI regional staff had been in contact with the unions representing affected staff and meetings are taking place over the next few days. The Department has also been in contact with Qantas New Zealand's receiver. Staff of other companies allied to the collapsed airline who have lost their jobs could also seek assistance from the Department, he said.

Mr Maharey said it was important that individuals affected by the closure of the airline made an appointment with their local DWI office so their individual circumstances could be asssessed.

"I have asked DWI to work with former Qantas New Zealand staff so that they are informed about the range of income support and other services the Department can provide.

"The level of support available will depend on individual circumstances so it is important DWI case workers sit down individually with all those seeking assistance. The Department will also need to know the composition of each former employee's final pay and it has been in contact with the Receiver to inform him of this requirement.

"Across the country DWI staff have also been in contact with the relevant unions. Each region is determining what additional action they will take according to local need. For example, DWI staff attended a meeting in Wellington today with affected staff," Steve Maharey said.

Mr Maharey encouraged those affected to contact the Department and make an appointment to see a case worker on 0800 559 009. The Call Centre and DWI Service Centres are closed on Anzac Day, but will reopen on Thursday 26 April.