---
title: "New Ambassador to Argentina"
date: 2001-04-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10333
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Unassigned Portfolio
---

New Zealand’s next Ambassador to Argentina will be career diplomat Carl Worker, Acting Foreign Affairs Minister Jim Sutton announced today.

“New Zealand and Argentina have enjoyed a longstanding bilateral relationship. With the launch of the Government’s Latin America Strategy last year, we’re broadening and deepening areas in which we work together with Argentina.

“Argentina is our largest South American trading partner, with annual two-way trade currently at $NZ188 million. New Zealand investment in Argentina, primarily in the areas of forestry, fisheries and film, is estimated to be approximately $US140 million. On the trade front, Argentina and New Zealand work together as members of the Cairns Group in the pursuit of open unsubsidised agricultural trade,” Mr Sutton said.

He said that, through the Valdivia group New Zealand and Argentina co-operate on environmental issues. New Zealand also has bilateral agreements relating to the Antarctic, Science and Technology, Conservation and Sports cooperation.

“We recognise the potential for the relationship to develop further, and to that end we recently decided to provide Argentina with training and technical assistance in areas such as agriculture, forestry, fishing, environment, governance and public sector reform.

“The development and expansion of these links with Argentina is important for New Zealand. I am therefore pleased to be able to announce the appointment of an experienced diplomat to this important role,” Mr Sutton said.

Mr Worker is currently the Ministry’s Personnel Division Director. He joined the Ministry in 1980 and had a secondment to the Australian Foreign Service early in his career, before serving in Beijing twice, Suva and Hong Kong. The latter appointment was as Consul-General.

A fluent Spanish speaker, Mr Worker takes up this position, which includes cross-accreditation to Uruguay and Paraguay, in November. He replaces Caroline Forsyth who is returning to Wellington.