---
title: "Government welcomes report on community sector"
date: 2001-04-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10286
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Community and Voluntary Sector
---

The Government is welcoming a new report on how the relationship between the state and non-government organisations can be improved, Community and Voluntary Sector Minister Steve Maharey said today.

Mr Maharey today released the report of the Community and Voluntary Sector Working Party, Communities and Government - Potential for Partnership, which he commissioned last May. The sector plays an important and growing role in New Zealand society and Mr Maharey said the Government wants to ensure it is fully recognised and valued.

"The Government welcomes the Working Party's report. I want to thank Dorothy Wilson and the other members for producing a comprehensive and thought provoking piece of work which we will carefully consider.

“Community organisations play a key role in the delivery of services across New Zealand. The Working Party was charged with reporting to me on how the relationship between Government, which funds and contracts with community providers, and the voluntary sector could be enhanced.

"It is estimated that there are 60,000 voluntary organisations in New Zealand and approximately 1.1 million New Zealanders do some form of voluntary work. Over $1.3 billion is invested in services provided by the voluntary sector annually, funded equally by the Government and non-government sources including through lottery and other grants, donations and bequests.

"The report provides a catalyst for very necessary change. The several strands of work it outlines provide a robust plan for the Government and the sector to work in partnership to give them a sustainable long-term base from which to build.

“The Government intends studying the report in detail and a formal Government response will be made in June," Steve Maharey said.