---
title: "Caribbean support for South Pacific whale sanctuary welcomed"
date: 2001-04-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10393
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

Conservation Minster Hon Sandra Lee has welcomed support from Caribbean countries for a South Pacific whale sanctuary.

Ms Lee says residents of the six Caribbean countries that are members of the International Whaling Commission (IWC) were asked whether or not their countries should support the establishment of a whale sanctuary.

She says results from the Greenpeace-sponsored MORI poll showed over half (54%) of the public across the six countries support the sanctuary, and only 13% oppose it.

"It is heartening to see growing international support to protect whale populations in the Pacific," Ms Lee said, "especially so soon after the sanctuary proposal was given full support by Pacific Island Forum ministers at a summit in Apia, held 18-20 April."

Ms Lee said whaling nations could no longer ignore the growing international opposition.

At last year's IWC meeting in Adelaide, all of the Caribbean countries surveyed in this poll voted against the creation of a South Pacific Whale Sanctuary when it was formally proposed then for the first time jointly by New Zealand and Australia.

"That attitude was a direct challenge to the wishes of the South Pacific states and, in light of the poll, it seems, against the wishes of their own people," she said.

"The Apia Statement which resulted from the recent ministerial meeting is a clear and unequivocal expression of the unanimous desire of Pacific Island countries for a whale sanctuary. I trust that Caribbean leaders will take note of both. The Apia Statement and the poll results show a growing momentum towards permanent protection for the South Pacific breeding grounds of the great whales."

"Nearly 200 years ago, ships came from all over the world to plunder the whales and other marine mammals of the South Pacific," said Ms Lee.  
"The slaughter grew to an immense scale as advances in technology allowed the whalers to venture further into the Southern Ocean and stay at sea for increasingly long periods of time. That industry only ceased in New Zealand in 1964 and it will take a long time for populations to recover," she said.

This year's IWC meeting, to be held in London in July, will again vote on a proposal for a South Pacific Whale Sanctuary put up by Ms Lee and her Australian counterpart.

Ms Lee said there would be significant pressure on the Caribbean nations not to block the establishment of a sanctuary in the South Pacific.