---
title: "Improved building standard will benefit people with disabilities"
date: 2001-04-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10148
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Unassigned Portfolio
---

A newly revised national standard covering access to buildings and other public facilities will make life easier for people with disabilities and others such as older people and parents with children in pushchairs, Minister for Disability Issues Lianne Dalziel and Minister of Internal Affairs George Hawkins said today.

Both Ministers were speaking at the launch at Parliament of New Zealand Standard 4121: Design for Access and Mobility - Buildings and Associated Facilities.

The Standard applies to all new buildings and existing buildings (other than private dwellings) when they are altered or there is a change in use.

"The Standard is based on the premise that people with disabilities should be able to use buildings and other public facilities with the same convenience as everyone else," Lianne Dalziel said.

"Good access is absolutely critical - especially for people with physical disabilities and people with visual or hearing impairments. Unless provision is made from the outset to take diverse needs into account, many people are simply excluded from many areas of life. That is why buildings and public accommodation, car parks, kerbs and outdoor areas need to be accessible to all. "

Ms Dalziel said Standard 4121 was the only standard cited in the 1991 Building Act.

"Having the Standard included in the Building Act gives it a unique status and a weight it would not otherwise have. It is a good example of mainstreaming the interests, rights and needs of people with disabilities into important everyday legislation and codes."

Minister of Internal Affairs George Hawkins said the new Standard made good design sense for everyone, and accessible accommodation was important for tourism.

"New Zealand's rapidly growing tourist market has recognised the importance of enabling guests to use their facilities with the minimum of fuss and potential embarrassment," he said.

Mr Hawkins congratulated Standards New Zealand for drawing up the Standard, and the Building Industry Authority for funding its development.

Ms Dalziel also said the Standard was consistent with the vision of the New Zealand Disability Strategy, which she would be releasing shortly, and a signal of the Government's commitment to the strategy.