---
title: "PM's speech to Shanghai leaders, 18 April"
date: 2001-04-19
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10269
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

SPEECH AT DINNER FOR SHANGHAI CITY AND BUSINESS LEADERS AMERICAN CLUB, SHANGHAI, WEDNESDAY, 18 APRIL, 7.00 PM

I am delighted to welcome the Vice Mayor, other senior officials, industry leaders of Shanghai, and friends of New Zealand both old and new. It is always a pleasure to visit this historic and dynamic city. This is my second visit, and I look forward to returning for the APEC Leaders' Summit in October.

With me here in Shanghai is a senior business delegation from New Zealand. The New Zealand Government and business community are working together to develop even better relations with Shanghai and with China.  
We are all impressed at the fast pace of economic development here in Shanghai, ranging from its new construction to the number of cellphones in use and the many internet cafes which have sprung up. Like Shanghai's people, New Zealanders too take up new information and communications technologies as quickly as they come onto the market.  
The internet revolution opens up many new opportunities for business. New Zealand's economic development has always been challenged by the tyranny of distance. But in this age of instant communication, businesses can market, and in the case of many services deliver, their products in cyberspace. New Zealand can now turn its position in the international time zones to advantage as we work while others sleep.  
Trading stocks over the Internet is becoming increasingly popular in New Zealand. There is considerable international interest in the new sharemarket here in Shanghai and I am sure New Zealanders are adding it to their website addresses!  
There is huge potential for the sale and promotion of education and tourism services over the net, and both are a particular focus for our government and business delegation here. We were delighted that New Zealand, together with Australia, was the first Western destination approved for Chinese tourists.  
New Zealand as a tourist destination offers everything from sophisticated cities to beautiful mountains, lakes, rivers and beaches, and of course many superb golf courses. The culture and heritage of Maori are unique to New Zealand.  
Visitor numbers from China to New Zealand grew 46 per cent in the twelve months to February, to a total of 38,000. Of these, 16,000 were tourists, up 72 per cent on the previous year. This holiday market is worth NZ$50 million per annum to New Zealand, and on this visit we are here to promote its further growth.  
I am also pleased that so many young people from China are choosing to study in New Zealand. Around six thousand students came from China to New Zealand last year. China is by far New Zealand's fastest growing market for international education, since the Government of China liberalised the sector two years ago.  
New Zealand's education institutions are developing new relationships with Chinese institutions, such as the joint programme Waikato University has established with the Shanghai International Studies University.  
The friendly and co-operative nature of our trade and economic relationship has seen exports of other goods also rise significantly between New Zealand and China in recent years. But I think we can still do better. The economic delegation which has accompanied me on this visit represents a cross-section of New Zealand's key interests in China. With me are representatives of New Zealand's agriculture, forestry, and seafood industries, as well as service sector representatives from education, tourism, and the finance and insurance industry.  
I believe there will also be more opportunities for trade and collaboration between us in the new economy areas driven by science and technology. New Zealand may be a small country but we have an impressive history of innovation in science and technology. Now we are using our expertise in agricultural science technology to foster a world-class biotechnology industry.  
New Zealanders are developing new drugs and treatments for everything from sore throats (BLIS Technologies) to degenerative brain diseases (NeuronZ). Shanghai's sister city, Dunedin, has been at the forefront of New Zealand's bio- and environmental technology endeavours.  
Presently New Zealand is the only developed economy in our region posting solid growth. While we cannot compete with the impressive growth figures of China as a fast developing economy, the growth we presently have gives us a respectable place among the OECD economies.  
Companies from around the world are attracted by our open and competitive economic framework, our highly educated English-speaking workforce, our advanced information and communications infrastructure, and our abundant natural resources.  
A number of Chinese companies have already invested in New Zealand's primary sectors. I would like to invite investors in Shanghai, especially those with an already developed affinity for our country, to take a fresh look at business opportunities in New Zealand.  
Mayor Xu visited our country in 1999, and many of the Vice Mayors of Shanghai have also made their way to New Zealand in recent years. New Zealand was honoured to host a state visit by President Jiang Zemin in 1999, alongside the APEC meeting in Auckland.  
These very important exchanges are a good sign of the close relations which have developed between New Zealand and China, and between New Zealand and Shanghai.  
I now propose a toast to New Zealand and Shanghai: Bridging the Asia-Pacific through the 21st century.