---
title: "Exciting New Education Pathway for North Otara"
date: 2001-04-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10380
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The Government has agreed to put $14.4 million into what Education Minister Trevor Mallard says will be an exciting new concept for the Auckland suburb of Otara.

The plan is to bring Hillary College, Bairds Intermediate and Clydemore Primary together on one campus. The concept envisages the re-development of the Hillary College site into a multi-school “Village of Learning”.

The Village of Learning will have pre-school services on site, provide an integrated education for primary, intermediate and secondary students, and have close curriculum ties with the neighbouring Manukau Institute of Technology.

“It will provide a quality, seamless education to all of its students. Both educationally and culturally, the Campus will be a centre for innovation and excellence," Trevor Mallard said.

"The Village of Learning will be governed by a single board of trustees and will allow the three schools to share facilities that would normally not be available to primary and intermediate children."

The Village of Learning will be developed over the next three years, starting with the secondary facilities, then the primary and intermediate. When completed, it will have facilities for up to 1200 students, with the potential for further development to support 1800.

Some of the costs will be offset by the subsequent sale of the Bairds Intermediate and Clydemore Primary schools sites and the savings on normal capital expenditure.

Trevor Mallard said today’s announcement followed extensive consultation with the local community and with existing schools in the area.

"Having considered their views, I know the Village of Learning will be warmly welcomed by the Otara community. I would like to pass on my personal thanks to everyone who gave their time and effort to help get this exciting concept off the ground,” Trevor Mallard said.