---
title: "Apia meeting major boost for South Pacific Whale Sanctuary"
date: 2001-04-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10295
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

New Zealand’s Minister of Conservation Sandra Lee said the intention of New Zealand and Australia to submit the South Pacific Whale Sanctuary proposal to the International Whaling Commission meeting in London in July met with the unanimous support in principle from Pacific Island nations and territories represented at a just-concluded regional forum in Apia, Samoa.  
Ms Lee said the Pacific Island Forum meeting was held at the direction of Pacific Island leaders to progress the South Pacific Whale Sanctuary proposal which would cover most of the Pacific Ocean south of the equator. It would adjoin the existing Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary to the south.  
Countries and territories represented at the Apia meeting were Samoa, Australia, American Samoa, Cook Islands, French Polynesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Niue, New Zealand, New Caledonia, Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Tuvalu, Tokelau and Wallis and Futuna.  
The Pacific Island nations noted the critical significance of the South Pacific as breeding grounds for nine species of great whale and the serious depletion of whale populations in the region from commercial whaling last century.  
Ms Lee said it was also noted that the gathering of whales on their South Pacific breeding grounds was one of the truly great wildlife spectacles of the world.

"Whale-watching is a rapidly growing industry in the region enabling countries like the Kingdom of Tonga to develop sustainable economic opportunities for their people from carefully managed viewing opportunities for tourists of the breeding congregations of whales."  
Ms Lee said New Zealand and Australia, who are both members of the International Whaling Commission, would be heading to the London meeting in July to resubmit the South Pacific Whale Sanctuary proposal.  
The proposal was first submitted to the IWC at its meeting in Adelaide last year. It requires a three quarters majority vote of IWC member nations to be adopted.

"It should be clear now that there is widespread support amongst the island nations of the South Pacific for a whale sanctuary," Ms Lee said. "These magnificent animals have roamed our seas for millions of years and we wish them to be a living part of the inheritance we protect and pass on to the children of our region."  
Ms Lee said the Apia meeting also agreed to extend cooperation amongst countries in the region to assist each other in developing national measures for the conservation of whales.  
"Some countries expressed an intention to develop comprehensive legal measures within their Exclusive Economic Zones for the protection of whales to complement an IWC approved sanctuary.  
"The world should take note that conservation of marine life is one of the top priorities for the Pacific Island Forum," she said.  
‘We now look to the support of other countries in the world to bring the dream of a South Pacific Whale Sanctuary to reality. We also ask those countries who maintain an interest in commercial whaling to respect the cultural affiliation we have in the south Pacific to living whales and our desire to see them flourish unharmed in our region"  
Ms Lee acknowledged the strong support for the whale sanctuary from environmental organisations including Greenpeace, the Pacific Youth Environment Network, the World Conservation Union, the Royal Forest and Bird Protection Society and the Humane Society International, and from commercial whale-watch companies including New Zealand’s WhaleWatch Kaikoura.