---
title: "Thanks for invitation - Akaroa"
date: 2001-04-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10351
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

Introduction  
Thanks for invitation - Akaroa has many happy memories for me.  
Before I tackle some of the water issues, I want to signal some changes in emphases I am developing.  
Environmental management/protection involves us on a least three/four levels:  
Central  
Local government  
Neighbourhood / issue groups  
Individual / family  
Each level has a role to play.  
Central government -  
Getting the study done to understand the environmental impacts / consequences of human activity.  
Based on such studies - setting national environmental standards/ policy statements.  
Supporting / guiding local government.  
Monitoring local government -- processes and outcomes.  
Local government  
The decision makers -  
The facilitators of differing needs. (eg water allocation)  
The monitors of consents  
The measures of environmental impact  
Neighbourhood  
Feeding back the data on impact.  
Education  
Pushing boundaries  
The individual  
Adapting behaviour - (waste)  
The Minister -- to bind these different levels into one effective push for a cleaner, healthier environment.  
And so - to water  
Many of us living in New Zealand see our society as a rural society. In fact we are a bunch of townies. Our towns and cities are home to 85% of all New Zealanders. New Zealand is one of the most urbanised societies in the world.

For cities, one of the most important issues is the management of water. Historically, cities were located on rivers or harbours to facilitate transport of people and goods in and out. Being located on rivers or harbours put many cities at risk from flooding. Yes, water management is an important urban issue.

Cities may not have the same overall impact on the aquatic environment that our rural areas have. That's primarily because cities make up only 3% of this country's land. However, the higher intensity of land use means that the impact is more concentrated than in rural areas. And more importantly, cities are where most of us live, and so many of us interact with urban aquatic environments. So we are affected by what goes on in urban catchments.

Cities tend to be located along harbours, estuaries and river mouths, and so are in the most sensitive parts of the coast. These areas are critically important for aquatic biodiversity. Many marine and freshwater fish spawn or have their early lifestages in these waters, before they complete their higher education upstream or offshore. (Pauatahanui Inlet) It is these waters that receive much of the stormwater and even sewage from cities.

An adequate supply of safe water is vital to human health and survival. Protecting the quality of drinking water is a pre-requisite for good health. The relatively recent identification of disease-causing bugs such as Giardia and Cryptosporidium transmitted through drinking water has focused attention on the potentially serious stomach illnesses they can cause. Our friends in Sydney recently experienced what it is like when water supplies were contaminated with Cryptosporidium. Auckland had its own water "crisis", an issue of quantity rather than quality.

Meanwhile, many people are responding to real or perceived problems of water quality by consuming bottled water at a cost that could be more usefully directed to water quality improvements. Many water supplies are of excellent quality. However, this is not always the case. The Ministry of Health surveyed public water supplies in 1998. This showed that 19% of the people covered by this survey were supplied with drinking water that failed to comply with microbiological criteria.

There's a general perception that the clear, clean water that pours out of our taps is mainly used for drinking. However, only a very small portion is used for drinking and cooking. Some is used for watering gardens, but most is used for carrying our wastes. So of the water which enters a city in a water pipe, the vast majority leaves in our sewers. And to this we must add that which leaves in stormwater mains.

Cities in New Zealand have hundreds, sometimes thousands of kilometres of water supply pipes, stormwater pipes, and sewerage pipes, water treatment plants, wastewater treatment plants, pumping stations. I've been told that this infrastructure is worth around six billion dollars. This infrastructure has a limited life, after all sewers carry rather unpleasant liquids. And most cities are growing, some very rapidly. Many cities have not kept up with the maintenance and replacement needed.

What is the nature of the industry that provides our water and disposes our liquid wastes? It's largely owned by local authorities, and hence by ratepayers. They are effectively monopolies. There's some competition for the collection and disposal of solid waste. However, there is no real choice when it comes to water supply and wastewater disposal. These monopolies tend to deal with most aspects of water, from supply, reticulation through to disposal - they are vertically integrated. They are also fragmented - each territorial authority runs its own operation.

What is the nature of the regulatory regime that controls this industry? In short, it's complicated. There's the Local Government Act, the Health Act, the Resource Management Act involving district and city councils, regional councils, local authority trading enterprises, and health authorities.

So what does this mean? Cities are important-- to me, to most New Zealanders who live in them, to the country as a whole. By world standards, water management in our cities is pretty good. But by the standards most New Zealanders set themselves, there's plenty of scope for improvement. Most city folk are pretty ignorant about where their water comes from, where it goes to once used, and the complex infrastructure that lies between. In places, this infrastructure is struggling to cope.

This suggests that we need to do things differently.

There are challenges to be faced about the efficient use of water, losses due to leaks in reticulated supplies and discouraging wasteful practices.

But there's more to urban water management than dams, pipes and sewers. Streams are the Cinderellas of our urban environments. These streams need to be recognised as key features of our towns and cities and treated with respect. These streams are essential for the natural environment and biodiversity. As rich habitats and as wildlife corridors, their influence can extend for many miles. They can improve the quality of life for people living in urban areas.

I am strongly of the view that all sectors of the community including local, regional and central government and iwi have a part to play in developing and implementing sustainable solutions. But no one group has an absolute mandate for urban sustainability and neither should they. It is just too big and too complex. We need to work together.

I would like to say here that I believe most decisions about urban water management are best made at a local level with community input. Local government is in a central position to respond to its local constituency. It has to weigh up competing interests. A range of environmental values has to be considered.

I have not forgotten the role of central government. There is a clear national interest in urban water management, especially in achieving outcomes in health. Planned upgrades involve the expenditure of large sums of money. I believe there are minimum standards for environmental quality below which we, as a nation, should not fall. As Minister for the Environment I am aware that central government has an important part to play in complementing and supporting the efforts of local government and the community. I see the partnership between central and local government as an important one. I want to see it developed further. In my mind this is a partnership between equals.

Each level of government is best suited to dealing with particular aspects of urban problems. Central government is able to shape institutional structures and systems, including regulatory frameworks such as the Local Government Act, Rating Powers Act and the Resource Management Act. Furthermore, it is better placed to address some of the issues common to all urban areas.  
\- Role of setting national standards - supportive for local.  
Role of monitoring processes and environmental impacts at local level.

A survey of 2000 New Zealanders by the International Social Survey Program released last month investigated attitudes toward our environment and its management. The survey found that pollution of rivers, lakes and streams is seen by New Zealanders as our number one environmental concern. Interestingly, the study found that there is a widespread belief that New Zealand's clean and green image is a myth and that our small population is the only reason we are cleaner than other countries.

To some disappointment, the study found that New Zealanders are less involved in environmental protection activities now than they were in 1993 and are less willing to pay for protecting the environment through higher prices and taxes. While our concerns for the environment are clear, the attitudes highlighted in the study suggest that the environment is less important to New Zealanders than in 1993. I hope that this is not a long term trend - rather a short-term aberration -- and that New Zealanders realise that the task of safeguarding the environment cannot and should not be left to central or local government, but is ultimately the responsibility of us all.

I would like to describe briefly an example of the type of approach to urban water management that is close to my heart.

Last year I attended the launch of Wai Care in Auckland. Wai Care is the Auckland pilot of a Clean Streams Resource Kit. Clean Streams is a national urban water quality, habitat and biological resource assessment manual and kit for use by community groups. It aims to integrate stream monitoring tools and programs into a nationally focused approach and will provide councils with a tool to promote community awareness of urban stream quality and management.

Wai Care is a stunning example of the success which community-council partnerships can have.

The development of Wai Care has taken great enthusiasm, energy and commitment from many organisations. Seeing councils, community groups and schools working so closely together is a real plus. It is a model that I think can be used in other towns and cities in New Zealand.

Not only does Wai Care allow community groups and schools to go out and monitor their local stream, it also allows this knowledge to be spread to the wider community. From this base of information informed decisions can be made on what actions to take to improve each individual stream.

Wai Care recognises that the whole community needs to take responsibility for the environment and maintaining New Zealand's clean green image. Wai Care works with the broader community and allows local people, young and old, to take responsibility for their local waterway. Wai Care empowers communities to work together for healthy catchments. People learn about the problems and develop solutions to improve waterways. This creates communities who are actively caring for their own environments.

The Wai Care idea is positive in that monitoring streams by community groups provides a good information base on the real state of the environment. The average New Zealander is not well informed of the reality of environmental issues that we face. This can lead to complacency because these issues are not perceived to be a major problem that we can or should do something about. We all need access to real information.

The Ministry for the Environment is developing a national programme of Environmental Performance Indicators. This includes the development and use of indicators to measure and report on how well we are looking after our environment. There is a real future in community information being linked with monitoring information collected at a regional and national level so that the real state of the New Zealand environment can be seen.

There are many ideas for the future development of the Wai Care approach. These include the development of iwi pilot groups that could incorporate customary indicators as part of the monitoring programme

There are many other excellent examples of urban-related water management initiatives that contribute to achieving my vision. A number of these are funded through the MfE Sustainable Management Fund. Examples include:

A Comprehensive Urban Stormwater Management Action Strategy being developed and trialled by the Waitakere City Council;  
An Urban Stream Habitat Assessment System to assist with assessing urban stream habitats and measuring their biological health; and  
Stream Sense - a package of education methodologies for secondary schools based on turning awareness into action.

One final point I would like to raise relates to an upcoming initiative. The 10th anniversary of the Rio Earth Summit is in 2002. A key principle of Agenda 21 is community participation. Community participation, and by that I mean the community in its widest sense, is the cornerstone of democracy. And participation in local decision-making is a key ingredient in developing strategies to overcome urban water problems. If the community does not have a common vision or buy into the strategies then problems with urban water management will continue. We need the community to help develop ideas and visions and to help turn visions and strategies into reality.

A Rio+10 community programme from April to June this year will seek input from the community on whether New Zealand is making enough progress in tackling environmental issues and what our priorities for the future ought to be. We want as many people as possible to have their say on what we have achieved over the last 10 years, what we have failed to do, and the future challenges we face.

The feedback from this community programme will inform our international reporting and our thinking about next steps on sustainable development in New Zealand.

I welcome innovative initiatives such as this Reflection Group and look forward to hearing about the development of any new tools to assist decision-making in urban water management.