---
title: "Benefits and super rise, work-for-the-dole abolished"
date: 2001-04-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10143
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Increased payments for beneficiaries, student allowance recipients, superannuiants and veterans and the abolition of the work-for-the dole scheme take effect from today.

All benefits and superannuation receive a 3.98 percent inflation adjustment. The increases mean a substantial injection of money into local economies. Broken down by region, the Department of Work and Income (DWI) expects benefit increases to pump an additional $12m into Northland; $97m into Auckland; $26m into the Waikato; $31m into the Bay of Plenty, $20m into the East Coast and Hawkes Bay; $20m into Taranaki; $25m into the Manawatu, Horowhenua and Wairarapa; $26m into Wellington; $16m into Marlborough, Nelson and the West Coast; $40m into Canterbury; and $31m into Otago and Southland over a twelve month period.

Mr Maharey said the Government also implemented a campaign promise today to abolish the failed work-for-the-dole scheme. DWI was now gearing itself up for changes which take effect on 1 July and shift the emphasis away from make-work schemes to moving beneficiaries off welfare into real jobs paying real wages.

"The increases which take effect from today will assist beneficiaries and superannuiants with recent cost of living increases. The increases will also boost regional economies because the additional money will be spent locally.

"Examples of the increases in the after-tax weekly rates are:  
\* for an unemployed person receiving the community wage, or a full time student living away from home aged over 25, up $5.92 to $154.56;  
\* for a married couple on the community wage with no children, up $9.86 to $257.58;  
\* for a single person aged 18-19 years on the community wage living at home, up $3.94 to $103.03;  
\* for a single person over 18 receiving the invalid’s benefit, up $7.39 to $193.18;  
\* for a sole parent with one child, up $8.47 to $221.37;  
\* for a married couple who both qualify for New Zealand Superannuation, up $13.82 to $360.82; and,  
\* for a war disablement pensioner receiving 100% disability rate, up $5.85 to $152.75.

"Today also sees the formal abolition of the work-for-the-dole scheme. Official advice received by the Government proved the scheme was a total failure in moving job seekers off welfare and into real work.

"DWI case managers have now been freed up to focus on getting beneficiaries into real jobs, paying real wages. This is a hard-headed change - if beneficiaries repeatedly fail to meet their obligations to actively seek work they can expect to have their benefit suspended until those obligations are met.

"Starting from 1 July DWI is introducing personalised Job Seeker Agreements which detail how DWI will assist each unemployment beneficiary back into the workforce. The Agreements will include training opportunities, work experience and other support which the Department agrees to provide and the obligations on the job seeker to take up those opportunities," Steve Maharey said.