---
title: "Police Minister Pleased With Progress on PERF Issue"
date: 2001-04-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10402
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Police
---

The Minister of Police, George Hawkins, has confirmed that he raised the issue of the Police Early Retirement Fund ("PERF") Scheme in his regular weekly meeting with the Police Commissioner Rob Robinson this afternoon. "The PERF scheme is designed to provide a lump sum payment (comprising employee and employer contributions) to police who are forced to leave the Police on physical or psychological grounds" said Mr Hawkins. "It was never designed to benefit those who have been convicted of serious offences." "The Commissioner shares my concern that those leaving the Police for reasons other than physical or psychological impairment should not be able to claim the benefits of the Scheme" said the Minister. "He is concerned about people who have convictions for serious crime and then attempt to Perf."

Mr Hawkins said he has asked the Police Commissioner to look carefully at the current provisions of the PERF Scheme and consider whether any amendments are necessary to ensure that the scheme is not misused. He has also asked the Commissioner to look at ways to ensure that police who commit serious crimes are dealt with effectively. "In considering those issues, the Commissioner will take a wide ranging look at possible solutions" said Mr Hawkins. "This will include looking at the way other jurisdictions operate. For example, one Australian state has a provision whereby an officer can be dismissed if the Police Commissioner loses confidence in that individual" Any changes resulting from the review would be incorporated in the next amendment of the Police Act. "I had a productive and useful discussion with the Commissioner and will continue to support him as he works through the issues and finds a way forward" said Mr Hawkins".