---
title: "New tripartite forum meeting"
date: 2001-04-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10188
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - State Services
---

State Services Minister Trevor Mallard said the Government has taken a major step in the new relationship between unions and the Public Service following the first tripartite forum involving the Public Service Association, Ministers, and departmental chief executives.

The forum has been set up following the Partnership for Quality approach that the Government and the PSA agreed upon in May last year.

Trevor Mallard said they were a means of giving practical effect to the Partnership for Quality agreement.

“The aim of the meetings is to open regular, sustained, constructive dialogue at the highest level of the Public Service. Such an approach recognises that the PSA, Ministers, and departments must have a relationship that goes beyond pay and conditions.

“Yesterday's meeting involved me, chief executives from six government departments, and PSA representatives. We met in the spirit of working together to strengthen relationships within the sector.

“The Partnership for Quality is also in line with the recommendations of the State sector standards board, which were made public in March. That report suggested a more collaborative approach to State sector management, and which also outline a stronger role for the centre.”

Trevor Mallard said the first meeting of the forum had discussed the general topic of Public Service careers and had agreed that the next meeting would deal with recommendations aimed at reducing bonus payments.