---
title: "Creating strong regional economies - Regional Partnerships third round"
date: 2001-04-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10348
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Industry and Regional Development
---

"Regions have the answers that will secure their futures," said the Minister for Regional Development Jim Anderton today on the announcement of the latest six regions to receive Regional Partnerships Programme funding from Industry New Zealand.

"Each region that develops a regional plan and uses it to grow makes our overall economy stronger, creating jobs and generating income. Regional Development is like creating strong Super 12 regional economies.

"The ideas that each plan needs have to come from local people committed to making their regional economy work. Now these regions are funded we want them to be as successful as they possibly can," said Jim Anderton.

Jim Anderton was pleased to see partnerships' funding going to the West Coast, Otago, Taranaki, Waikato, Waitomo / King Country and the Coromandel/Hauraki/Matamata Piako regions.

Funding announced today is as follows:  
West Coast $100,000  
Otago$100,000  
Taranaki$94,000  
Waikato$30,375  
Waitomo/ King Country$55,000  
Coromandel/Hauraki/  
Matamata Piako$88,000

The funding is to assist regions to create economic development plans. Up to a further $100,000 may be applied for to ensure the plans can be implemented and then funding of up to $2 million per region is available to contribute to major regional initiatives that come out of the strategies developed in the first two stages.

A total of over $1,300,000 has now been approved to 14 support regions since the scheme was launched last year. The other regions supported in the first two rounds are Wanganui/Ruapehu/Rangitikei, Marlborough, Rotorua, Northland, Hawkes Bay, Kapiti/Horowhenua, Wairarapa, Tairawhiti.

Media Inquiries:Sam Fisher \[press secretary] 021 714 209, 04 471 9289  
email: sam.fisher@parliament.govt.nz, http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/anderton/index.html or http://www.alliance.org.nz

Media Release  
27 April 2001

Industry New Zealand funding boosts regional development

Regional development has received a boost with six new regions receiving a total of nearly $500,000 from Industry New Zealand's Regional Partnerships Programme.

Regions allocated funding in the latest round announced today are:

· West Coast $100,000  
· Otago$100,000  
· Taranaki$94,000  
· Waikato$30,375  
· Waitomo/ King Country$55,000  
· Coromandel/Hauraki/  
Matamata Piako$88,000

Michael Andrews, Industry New Zealand Chairman, says the Regional Partnerships Programme aims to help communities work together to take advantage of local strengths and opportunities.

"A very important aspect of the programme is that community groups and organisations that previously had not worked together are now collaborating closely on common planning for their region," Mr Andrews says.

Fourteen regions from throughout the country have now received support totalling around $1.3 million. The programme was launched in October 2000.

End

For further information contactNigel Morris Industry NZ, Phone (04) 495 5089, or 025 546 412

Notes to Editors

The Government has allocated $33.750 million for regional development over the next three years.

Under the Regional Partnerships Programme, up to $100,000 is available to assist individual regions to develop strategic plans. Further assistance of up to $100,000 per year is available to help build the ability to implement those plans.

Funding of up to $2 million per region is available to contribute to major regional initiatives that come out of the strategies developed in the first two stages.

Regional contacts

Region Regional contact

1st & 2nd round approvals

Marlborough

Rotorua

Wairarapa

Wanganui/  
Ruapehu/  
Rangitikei

Tairawhiti

Northland

Hawkes Bay

Kapiti/  
Horowhenua

3rd round approvals

Coromandel/Hauraki/ Matamata Piako

Otago

Taranaki

Waikato

Waitomo/King Country

West Coast

Marlborough Economic  
Development Trust  
Tony Smale 03 577 9080

Rotorua District Council  
Ross Stanway 07 348 4199

Masterton Business Enterprise Ltd  
Geoff Copps 06 378 8010

Wanganui District Council  
Craig Roberts 06 349 0001

Gisborne District Council  
Rick Mansell 06 867 2049

Northland Regional Council  
Warren MacLennan 09 438 4639

Vision 2020 Incorporated  
Dr Karen Cooper 06 879 9972

Enterprise Horowhenua  
Tony Rush 06 367 0524

Tourism Coromandel  
Mr John Archibald 07 868 5985

Dunedin City Council  
Peter Brown 03 477 4000

Venture Taranaki  
Stuart Trundle 06 759 5150

Hamilton Economic Development forum  
Mike Underhill 07 838 1399

Waitomo Chamber of Commerce  
David Hearn 025 244 2516

Grey District Council  
Frank Ash 03 768 5775

Further information on regional development activities in a particular region is available from the regional contacts above.