---
title: "MZ memorial a tribute to the Anzac relationship, says PM"
date: 2001-04-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10309
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark said today that the new New Zealand Memorial in Canberra provides a striking and enduring symbol of the close relationship between New Zealand and Australia.

The Prime Minister is visiting Canberra today to attend the dedication ceremony for the New Zealand Memorial. The visit also includes a lunch with Australian Prime Minister John Howard, and the opening of the Anzac: The New Zealand Story exhibition at the Australian War Memorial.

Helen Clark said the New Zealand Memorial is New Zealand's gift to mark Australia's centenary of federation and symbolises the strength of the trans-Tasman relationship.

"The Anzac relationship has evolved over time. We are two separate nations but, perhaps more than any other two countries, we share close family, historical, cultural, sporting and economic bonds. These links join together our two countries in a warm friendship.

"Australia has long been New Zealand's most important bilateral link. It is New Zealand's most important trading partner, and the largest market for our goods and services. We co-operate closely together on trans-Tasman issues, in the region, and around the world.

"New Zealand and Australia have a shared military history since both countries sent troops to the Boer War. It was natural to turn to each other for soldiers, supplies and support in time of need.

"Under the ANZAC banner of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps, we served together in Gallipoli. We fought alongside each other in the mud on the Western Front, and in Vietnam.

"Our shared commitment to peacekeeping and to alleviating the plight of the people of East Timor brought us together in the Australian-led INTERFET deployment and now in the United Nations peacekeeping operation.

"The New Zealand Memorial, located at the entry to Anzac Parade, Canberra, commemorates the joint endeavours, common interests and long friendship of the New Zealand and Australian peoples.

"The Memorial symbolises the longstanding New Zealand-Australia relationship through its bronze structures representing the handles of a Maori kete or flax basket."

Helen Clark was accompanied to Canberra by Defence Minister Mark Burton, the Chief of Defence and a New Zealand Defence Force contingent, RSA members representing conflicts in which New Zealand and Australia have fought together, members of the Memorial project team, and three young New Zealanders who were runners-up in the Crete essay contest.

Background Information

The design for the memorial was chose after a competition in 1996/97. The winning design was the work of Kingsley Baird with the Studio of Pacific Architecture, both from Wellington.

The design represents the two handles of a basket or kete. The image is of two people sharing the same load. The words, 'Each of us at one handle of the basket/Mau tena Kiwai o te Kete, Maku tenei!', will be prominently displayed on a small wall at the edge of the paving on both handles. The handles are 11.5 metres high, and are constructed of bronze. The two handles are different and each has its own distinct character.

The manufacture occurred in a Melbourne foundry, Meridian. No New Zealand foundry was able to complete the casting within the time and budget required.

Beneath each handle is a large circular paving. On the Australian side, the paving is in an original Aboriginal design, the work of Daisy Nadjungdanga from Maningruda in Northern territory. On the New Zealand side, the design is Maori, and is the work of Toi te Rito Maihi and Allen Wihongi from Northland.

The paving on the New Zealand side was constructed by Stresscrete of Otaki. The stone came from the Coromandel, Golden Bay and Canterbury. The rock for the Australian side comes from Australia.

At the centre of the paving and beneath the handle there will be buried soil from Chunuk Bair, Gallipoli (on the New Zealand side) and from Lone Pine (on the Australian side). The soil will be contained in wooden boxes - rimu in the New Zealand case, Australian jarrah in the Australian. Above the soil will be a granite stone (from Coromandel) with the words: Beneath this stone lies soil from Chunuk Bair, Gallipoli.

From the central point, concentric circles carry the names inscribed in the paving of those battles in which New Zealanders fought alongside Australians.

Across the front of each handle are bronze teeth which represent the edge of the kete or basket. One of the bronze teeth will note that the memorial is a gift from the New Zealand people to the Australian people and contain details of the dedication. Another tooth will contain a poem written by Jenny Bornholdt, the Wellington poet, for the memorial. The poem reads:  
The sea we cross over  
and over. Tides turning on  
gold and sheep. On rain. On sand.  
On earth the fallen lie  
beneath. On geography. On  
women standing, Matilda  
waltzing. On people of  
gardens and movement.  
On trade and union.  
This sea is a bridge  
of faith. This sea we are  
contained and  
moved by.

The cost of the New Zealand Memorial is $3.6 million.