---
title: "Start date for managing hazardous substances"
date: 2001-04-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10369
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

A new system for managing hazardous substances safely will be introduced from July 2, the Minister for the Environment, Marian Hobbs, announced today.

"That is when the 'hazardous substances' part of the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms (HSNO) Act 1996 will come into force," the Minister said.

"This is a major advance in protecting people’s health and the environment from the harmful effects of many substances that are essential to our daily lives.

"Hazardous substances range from household bleach and turpentine to fireworks, petrol, pesticides and major industrial chemicals. If not well managed they can explode, catch fire, poison us or pollute our environment.

"Even in New Zealand's relatively short history, we have plenty of examples of the careless or ill-informed use of chemicals that have left workers with ongoing health concerns and land-owners or the Government with expensive problems, such as the contaminated site at Mapua, to clean up."

A key feature of the new system is that the public may have input into the process of assessing and setting controls on hazardous substances new to New Zealand. This was not possible under previous laws.

"The new regime will ensure effective risk-management of hazardous substances in a way that fits well with international best practice," Marian Hobbs said. "Now we have a system that covers all hazardous substances from the time they are imported or manufactured through to disposal of residues.

"One central agency, the Environmental Risk Management Authority, will now make decisions on which new hazardous substances can be introduced to New Zealand and will set controls to ensure that they are used safely."

The Minister said the gap between the law being passed and the new system coming into force was due to the complexity of creating one coherent set of regulations under the HSNO Act from more than 20 existing laws.

"And we have gone out of our way to work through the major issues with industry and the other agencies involved in HSNO, so that the transition to the new system will be as trouble-free as possible," Marian Hobbs added.

"The July 2 start date will be of most immediate relevance to importers and manufacturers of new hazardous substances. They will now need Authority approval before they can introduce new substances. But most of the major players are already well aware of the new controls and have been involved in the development or review of the regulations.

"For those who manufacture, use or transport hazardous substances that are already legally present in this country, it will be pretty much business as usual for a while. ERMA New Zealand needs to work through the process of transferring many thousands of existing substances to the new system before any changes in the way they are controlled will take effect.

"The first transfers are expected to take place over the next two years and will cover dangerous goods, explosives and pesticides. However, once the Authority starts approving applications to introduce new substances, it will impose controls on these substances under the HSNO Act, which people must comply with. Over the transitional period there will effectively be two parallel systems of controls in place."

The Minister said the transitional period would provide an opportunity for many large and small businesses to get up to speed with the new system.

"There will be plenty of ways people can do this, ranging from a website at www.hsno.govt.nz, to seminars and workshops, to guidance material developed by the Ministry for the Environment and ERMA New Zealand, and advice from the agencies which already have experts in this field.

"A series of agencies, led by the Occupational Safety and Health Service, Ministry of Health and territorial authorities, with oversight from ERMA New Zealand, will work together to ensure effective enforcement of the new controls. These agencies have worked hard to set up agreements between themselves so that there is no duplication, overlap or gap in enforcement," Ms Hobbs said.

"I want to reiterate the Government’s commitment to a comprehensive compliance and enforcement regime, which includes local government. I know there are resourcing issues to be addressed, and my colleagues and I are looking at these.

"It is vital that local authorities retain their capacity to provide hazardous substances advice and enforcement during the process of transferring existing substances to the new law. The existing controls will still apply for some years. Additionally, local authorities will continue to have an important role under the Resource Management Act in managing activities that involve hazardous substances," the Minister said.