---
title: "Positive Ageing - Ageing with Attitude"
date: 2001-04-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10214
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Senior Citizens
---

A strategy designed to steer positive attitudes about ageing and to reaffirm the value of older people in the community, was launched by Minister for Senior Citizens Lianne Dalziel in Wellington today.

The Minister launched the New Zealand Positive Ageing Strategy document at an all-day seminar "Positive Ageing in Action: Communities Working Together".

"This document is the start of encouraging all New Zealanders to celebrate older people, and to celebrate ageing. The strategy articulates Government's commitment to positive ageing as well as reinforcing the value we place on older people in society," Lianne Dalziel said.

"It is a blueprint for central government to ensure that older people's contributions are valued, to address issues for older New Zealanders, and create an environment in which people can age positively.

"The idea is to have a framework within which all Government policy with implications for older people can be commonly understood and developed.

"The document outlines key policy principles for positive ageing, and sets out priority goals and actions in 10 areas: income, health, housing, transport, ageing in place, cultural diversity, rural issues, attitudes, employment and opportunities.

"We must also recognise that ageing is a lifelong process and that the vision of the strategy will only be achieved if people of all ages have positive attitudes towards ageing."

The all-day seminar and strategy launch will also be marked with a fun debate arguing: "That positive ageing begins at birth". Lianne Dalziel will lead the affirmative team.