---
title: "Marshall New NZ High Commissioner to UK"
date: 2001-04-05
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10174
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

Russell Marshall will be New Zealand's new High commissioner to the United Kingdom from February 2002, Foreign Minister Phil Goff announced today.

"Russell Marshall brings with him enormous experience and expertise and skills to this important post.

"His three years as New Zealand's Foreign Minister gives him a good understanding of international affairs. Since then, his involvement in UNESCO has enhanced his experience and contacts in the international arena.

Mr Marshall was Education and Conservation Minister in the 1984 Labour Government before taking over as Foreign Minister in 1987. He was also Pacific Island Affairs Minister between 1988-90.

Educated at Auckland, Canterbury and Victoria universities, he is currently Chancellor of Victoria University and Chairman of the Tertiary Education Advisory Commission. He has also been Chairman of the New Zealand National Commission for UNESCO and was Permanent Representative to UNESCO from 1997-99.

"The United Kingdom is more than just our major market within the European Union. The British are key friends in Europe and globally. As a Security Council Permanent Member and G8 economic summit member, the UK maintains an influence in world affairs that New Zealand, with its close relationship, is able to tap into.

"With the Head Office of the Commonwealth in London, Russell will be well placed also to draw on the many African and Asian contacts he made in UNESCO and during his time as Chairman of the Commonwealth Observer Mission to South Africa in 1994," Mr Goff said.

Mr Marshall will be accompanied by his wife Barbara who is currently Family Liaison Coordinator for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Mr Marshall replaces Paul East QC who is completing his three-year term in February.