---
title: "Workforce 2010: information we can use"
date: 2001-04-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10342
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

A new government discussion paper released today by three Ministers identifies globalisation of the international economy and workplace as the key challenge facing New Zealand employers and employees in the next decade.

The Minister of Labour, Margaret Wilson; the Minister of Social Services and Employment, Steve Maharey; and the Minister of Immigration, Lianne Dalziel have released Workforce 2010. The paper analyses the challenges for the New Zealand labour market including the ageing population, rapid change, training and upskilling, migration, working conditions and technological change.

The study says the years to 2010 will see globalisation continue to change the face of New Zealand - with technology, demographic, social, workplace and workforce trends continuing. But it says this decade will provide an opportunity to build a strong base for the period after 2010 when demographic change such as the ageing of the population, will be even more pronounced.

Workforce 2010 adopts a framework for looking at the issues which is made up of three elements:

\* Capacity – the abilities our people have  
\* Opportunities– the options available for people to use their abilities  
\* Matching – connecting people's abilities to opportunities.

The Ministers said New Zealand is behind most other industrialised countries in looking at the challenges posed by the new labour market and impact of demographic change.

"We had a clear message from the business government forums and our consultations with union and community groups that a "whole of government" approach is needed to deal with these issues. As Ministers we are working together to bring accurate and thought-provoking material to business, unions, employees and communities.

"Workforce 2010 is the start of that process. The challenges we face can only be met if we understand them. Government, business and communities will all be significantly changed by the forces identified in the discussion document. Our choices and options are increased by effective targeted research.

"The responses to the information will help deepen our understanding of the way our labour market is developing. This will inform the government policy process and build confidence for business and employees as they plan for their futures".