---
title: "Minister opens Children's Respite House in Auckland"
date: 2001-04-26
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10366
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Unassigned Portfolio
---

Minister for Disability Issues Lianne Dalziel officially opened the new Garden Court children's respite care house in South Auckland today.

The house, the third in the Auckland region, was developed by Spectrum Care, an independent charitable trust, caring for people with disabilities.

Spectrum supports around 270 adults and children with an intellectual disability in residential care across Auckland, and the Minister welcomed the new House as an addition to services.

"What we have here now is a facility and service which will essentially provide vital support to those who provide vital support. Garden Court will be the lifeline many families have been crying out for. I am very aware of the special love and care that you as parents and caregivers put into caring for children with complex and challenging needs. I also know that having time away from these duties is an important part of looking after yourselves so you can ensure the well-being of the entire family," Lianne Dalziel said at the opening ceremony today.

Spectrum Care has other respite houses for children in the Auckland region, on the North Shore, West Auckland and Orakau Road, where they specialise in care for babies.

"The opening of this new home goes a long way towards addressing the need for skilled support for families caring for children with high or challenging needs.

"Garden Court not only acknowledges the complex needs of children who come here, but this house finally fills a gap in co-ordinated respite support services in the South Auckland area."

The Minister said that providing professional care for children with complex needs, enabled parents and caregivers time to recharge their own batteries.

"With the focus on those needing care and support, it can be easy to forget the carers. We want to make sure that caring for carers is an important focus of the services provided for children with complex needs. Respite care supports the children as much as the families. Exhausted families are not in the interests of these children. Ensuring that families feel they can have some time to recuperate, relax and feel, as well as know, that they are being supported is vital."