---
title: "Electricity fixed charges: progress, but not enough"
date: 2001-04-29
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10358
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Energy
---

Minister of Energy Pete Hodgson has welcomed moves by several major electricity companies to introduce lower fixed charges, but warned the industry that it must go further if it wants to avoid regulation.

"Moves by the retailers Contact Energy, Mercury Energy and On energy to reduce fixed charges are good news for small electricity consumers," Mr Hodgson said. "The new low fixed charge tariffs should also encourage more efficient use of energy, with associated environmental benefits.

"While the emergence of low fixed charge options for consumers is welcome, they must become more widely available," said Mr Hodgson. "The industry must move further in this direction to meet the requirements set out in the Government Policy Statement on electricity issued last year."

The policy statement requires the industry to offer tariff options with fixed charges comprising no more than 10% of the bill for an average domestic consumer. The Ministry of Economic Development calculates that this means fixed charges of no more than about 30c/day ($110 a year, including GST).

Contact, Mercury and On energy have introduced new tariffs in the major centres of Auckland, Christchurch and Wellington with fixed charges below or around this level.

But Contact and On energy have yet to announce new, low fixed charge options for all their areas. First Electric has announced new tariffs for some of its areas, but they all have fixed charges above 30c/day. Bay of Plenty Energy, Fresh Start, Genesis, King Country Energy, Meridian Energy and Trustpower have yet to announce new tariffs.

Line companies will be required to facilitate retailers introducing the low fixed charge tariff options. Calculations indicate that this means fixed daily line charges passed by distributors to retailers for domestic consumers probably need to be less than about 15c/day.

UnitedNetworks, Vector, Northpower, WEL Energy, Eastland, Scanpower and Dunedin Electricity have introduced fixed charges below this level. But there are 22 other line companies that have yet to introduce pricing schedules with appropriately low fixed charges.

"As well as making low fixed charges more widely available I expect the industry to advertise and promote them in the same manner as existing tariffs," Mr Hodgson said. "I am aware that this is not yet happening."

"As the Government Policy Statement indicated, the Government will not hesitate to regulate if the industry does not deliver the desired results. Provisions for such regulation are included in the Electricity Industry Bill, currently being considered by Parliament's Commerce Committee."