---
title: "Improving services to veterans through case management and one-stop shop"
date: 2001-04-23
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10379
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark and Veterans' Affairs Minister Mark Burton announced today that the Office of Veterans' Affairs will become a one-stop shop for the provision of most health and other services to veterans.

"This new, case management approach will include assisting veterans to seek professional advice and treatment and to identify any opportunities for rehabilitation.

"The Office of Veterans' Affairs intends to contract with community organisations to deliver some of these services.

"From now on our veterans will have specific recognition as veterans and will not be regarded as pensioners or beneficiaries. We will be developing a service charter specifically for the War Pensions Unit which recognises the special needs and status of veterans and is completed in consultation with veterans' representative groups.

"This decision reflects the government's determination to give war veterans fair treatment.

"An enhanced claims panel process will be developed to assist with decisions on entitlements. The number of claims panels will be retained, as will the RNZRSA membership of those panels.

"The Secretary for War Pensions will be more involved in this decision making.

"The new seamless approach to the delivery of services will include a website which covers all veterans’ services and automatic transfers between relevant 0800 numbers," Helen Clark and Mark Burton said.