---
title: "RIO+10 Programme calls for debate on New Zealand's environment"
date: 2001-05-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10447
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

The Minister for the Environment, Marian Hobbs, is calling for public debate and community feedback on New Zealand’s environmental problems and priorities.

She is launching today the Rio+ 10 Community Programme as part of the Government's preparations for next year’s World Summit on Sustainable Development - 10 years on from the first 'Earth Summit' held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.

Public response to the Rio+10 programme will be incorporated into the environmental chapters of an international report New Zealand is preparing for the Summit.

Marian Hobbs says a recent Massey University survey showed almost half (42 percent) believed that New Zealand's clean, green image was a myth.

"This is disturbing," Marian Hobbs said. "As a country, we rely on being clean and green for success - not just in business and tourism, but for our quality of life. If we are to achieve this, we need people to have their say when decisions about the environment are being made."

The study also showed that a vast majority of New Zealanders (90 percent) value clean air, lakes and rivers, and unpolluted water in harbours and at our beaches.

"New Zealanders clearly do care about our environment and are concerned about the threats from pollution," Marian Hobbs added. "The Rio+10 community programme will prompt us to think about the quality of environment we want and how we should get there.

"I believe there is a real need to increase New Zealanders' understanding of environmental issues. Solving our major environmental challenges does not rest simply with central and local government and high-powered science, but with all of us.

"My vision for our environment involves people who treasure New Zealand's uniqueness; people who care about the health of our environment and for whom caring means more than words. This programme will help lift understanding of what our environmental challenges are, and what is needed to overcome them."

Marian Hobbs said people and organisations can get involved by requesting a "starter pack" from the Ministry for the Environment and filling in a response form, or by going along to one of a series of debates being run in main centres over the next two months.

The debates - "Our environment…trash can or treasure?" - will see local celebrities arguing that locals 'treasure' the environment, while the national team will argue many use the local environment as a dump for waste and emissions. While the debates will be light hearted, they will carry a serious message.