---
title: "Funding for implementation of new hazardous substances system"
date: 2001-05-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10493
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

The Government has provided additional funding to ensure the new system for safely managing hazardous substances is implemented effectively, the Minister for the Environment, Marian Hobbs, announced today.

"The Environmental Risk Management Authority’s funding has been increased by $1m1 to $5.75m for the implementation of the hazardous substances part of the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms (HSNO) Act," Ms Hobbs said.

"From July 2 this year, the Authority will make decisions on which new hazardous substances can be introduced to New Zealand and will set controls to ensure that they are used safely.

"The Government is keen to see that the transition to the new system is as smooth and efficient as possible.

"It is vital that the HSNO Act and regulations work effectively to protect the environment, and the health and safety of people and communities.

"The additional funding will help the Authority to develop and put in place the processes for assessing and setting conditions on hazardous substances."

The Minister said that many thousands of hazardous substances are legally in use in New Zealand and are essential to the daily operations of businesses and households.

"ERMA New Zealand has a huge task ahead of it to transfer these thousands of existing substances to the new hazardous substances system," Marian Hobbs said.

"The first transfers are expected to take place over the next two years.

"The ‘transfer project’ will be funded by the Government and this additional funding will help accelerate the work on transferring dangerous goods, explosives and pesticides.

ERMA New Zealand also has the overall role of monitoring enforcement performance and conducting inquiries under the Act.

The additional funding provided in this budget will assist ERMA in working with the enforcement agencies to ensure that the HSNO Act and regulations are complied with."