---
title: "Minister gives go-ahead for new hospital for Southland"
date: 2001-05-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10515
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King has given the go-ahead for the building of a new hospital in Invercargill.

"The people of Southland have been waiting for years for a decision on the future of their hospital services," said Mrs King. "I am delighted to announce approval to build a new regional hospital in Invercargill.

"The current hospital has served the community extremely well over many years. However, some of the hospital buildings are up to 80 years old, and much has changed in the way health services are provided over those years. It is essential that our hospital buildings are designed to take full advantage of the advances that have been made in health care delivery.

"It may have been possible to have simply upgraded existing facilities, but we have decided that a new modern hospital would be more effective and efficient in the long run.

"There is still work to be done around the preparation of this development but the Government has agreed to give it the go-ahed in principle, and I will be monitoring progress with great interest," said Mrs King.

Local MP Mark Peck said: “I brought Annette to Southland before the election to see the state of our hospital. She could see it needed replacing.

“I have put a lot of effort into getting the decision made to build a new hospital for Southland. I am absolutely thrilled this will now be done," said Mark Peck.