---
title: "Annette King launches health education website"
date: 2001-05-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10457
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King today officially launched the new Ministry of Health health education resources website, HealthEd, at the Newtown Union Health Service in Wellington.

Mrs King said the new website would make work far more straightforward for people in the health education sector. "All the Government's public health education resources can now be accessed through one web site. This initiative will help ensure that health education resources are available for the groups that need them, and that health professionals are aware of the many and varied education resources available to them."

Mrs King said the new website was part of the Government's commitment to  
e-government, using the internet to simplify the processes of government.

The HealthEd site, at www.healthed.govt.nz, is a register of New Zealand health education resources. There are more than 350 health education titles from the national health catalogue on the database, and the plan is to add titles over time from other health organisations as well.

Mrs King said the website was organised by categories such as Maori health, sexual health and food safety, and users could search for resources by clicking on "Health Category" or by entering a word or phrase. "For example, a search for Smokefree will produce a list of 57 different items, from pamphlets to videos, and posters in English and Maori. A click on the title reveals the full details."

Mrs King said each item was illustrated and detailed information was provided to ensure health educators requested the right resources for the target group they wished to reach. "The site is designed mainly for use by health professionals although the public can access it and request resources. The supply of resources listed on the site is managed by a variety of health providers around the country. Users select their local health provider when requesting titles."

One feature that would speed the use of the site by health professionals was a "shopping basket", Mrs King said. "They can submit requests for multiple items and process them all at the same time."