---
title: "Building skills for the knowledge society"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10631
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

"The Government will plough an extra $56 million over the next four years to buy an estimated 17,400 additional industry training places, Associate Minister of Education \[Tertiary Education] Steve Maharey said today.

He said the funding boost would ease the skills shortages in the economy and contribute significantly to the Government's goal of developing an inclusive knowledge society.

"The increase builds on the $23 million allocation provided last year and will take total investment in industry training to $338.9 million over the next four years.

"Up to $1 million of the extra funds for the coming year will be targeted to a new technology training project. We want to increase employees' access to learning through the use of new learning technologies, such as computer-based learning," Mr Maharey said.

"New funding of $2.025 million in 2001-02, rising subsequently to $3.75 million annually, is also provided in the Budget to increase to 14,750 the number of Youth Training placements with a particular emphasis on teaching basic literacy, numeracy and communication skills to long term unemployed 16-17 year olds.

"Pilot Tertiary Education Learning and Assessment Centres designed for people at risk of educational failure, will also be established in at least two communities at a cost of $1.75 million over four years. They will provide face-to-face advice about available opportunities and learning support," Steve Maharey said.