---
title: "Creative industries supported by Enterprise Awards"
date: 2001-05-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10460
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Deputy Prime Minister
---

7 May 2001Media Release

Creative industries supported by Enterprise Awards  
Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton today announced the thirty businesses and entrepreneurs who will receive Enterprise Award Scheme grants in Round 5 of the scheme managed by Industry New Zealand.

"I am pleased to see that this round has a grant to a theatre company. Indian Ink, the production company responsible for Krishnan's Dairy and other stage plays, will received an award of $8,800 to help them improve their marketing.

"There is also an award for Al Fresco gardening and lifestyle Magazine to investigate regional inserts tailored to each region's gardening information needs.

"Creative Industries are a priority under this Labour Alliance Coalition Government and Economic Development staff are preparing papers on ways that music and other creative groups can be assisted. The Irish music industry earns $600 million of foreign exchange a year and New Zealand has the talent and skill to do better than we have been doing.

"This is NZ music month and only last week we announced that Industry New Zealand would be part funding the inaugural NZ Fashion week.

"The 30 awards in this round of the Enterprise Award Scheme brings the total number to 140, and the number of applications and the range of businesses applying continues to grow.

"More and more businesses are becoming aware of this scheme which recognises innovative ideas. In this round we have makers of businesses software, household ventilation system filters as well as industrial vehicle seatbelts," said Jim Anderton.

Other award recipients include a manufacturers of possum traps, fertiliser and the designers of a new computer mouse.

Entrepreneurs or small business owners can receive a maximum of $20,000, which can be used to fund up to 50 percent of the total cost of a project.

Small businesses and entrepreneurs interested in Enterprise Awards and other services and support from Industry New Zealand can look at the website www.industrynz.govt.nz.

Media Inquiries: Sam Fisher \[press secretary] 021 714 209, 04 471 9289  
email: sam.fisher@parliament.govt.nz, http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/anderton/index.html or http://www.alliance.org.nz

Round 5 Enterprise Award SchemeMay 2001

Northland  
Limelight Media  
Contact Mark Robinson 09 407 7031. $5,000 to assist in regional inserts for Alfresco magazine.  
Bay Flora Ltd  
$5,000, Testing appropriate plant species for business.

Auckland  
Enclosure Technology Ltd  
Contact, Guy Loughhead, 09 4769163. $2,250, prototype of enclosures rack for broadcasters.  
Richard's Kitchen  
Contact, Richard Morrison, $1,200 Intellectual property protection for cooking device.  
Indian Ink Ltd  
Contact Justin Lewis, 09 815 3325. $8,800, Investigating marketing opportunities.  
Springbelt Concept Ltd  
Contact, Don Wilkinson, 09 576 4660. $7,923, new safety belt for construction industry.  
Feral R&D Ltd  
Contact, Jeremy Kerr 021 1343 540. $5,000, feral animal trap.  
Mega Tech Ltd  
$8,275, Sheep milk processing enterprise.  
Honeycreme Ltd  
Contact Grant Ritchie, 09 576 5245. $8,438, New markets for honey based beauty products.  
South Pacific Software Ltd  
Contact, Alan Diepraam, 025 6429596. $2,352, cellphone management software development.  
BDG Ltd  
Contact Peter Alan 09 294 8914. $5,000, Business training programme development.  
Technology Development Group  
Contact Brad Houghton, 09 307 0700. $9,728, Personal development software marketing.  
SRB Pacific  
$8743, Intellectual property for a bicycle attachment.

Waikato  
S&E Burke  
Contact Stephen and Erica Burke, 07 866 7078. $6,362, Research uses for shellfish waste.  
Rennacs Ltd  
Contact Glenn Thornley, 07 823 6552. $6,350, Automobile testing system.

Bay of Plenty  
Blended Fertilisers Ltd  
Contact Brent Wilson, 07 575 2160. $8,438, new market exploration.  
Ice Air Ltd  
$1,407, intellectual property protection.

Hawkes Bay  
Coach House Gardens Ltd  
Contact Craig Henneker, 06 837 8660. $5,000, Feasibility study to investigate availability of groundwater for horticulture.

Manawatu-Wanganui  
Canvasland Holdings Ltd  
Contact Brendan Duffy, 06 368 7930. $5,000, develop a soft-edge trampoline.  
Coldotz Enterprises Ltd  
Contact Dot Horne, 06 368 4711. $7,102, traction devices for workboots.  
Tuff-Lite Ltd  
Contact Kevin Halsalll o6364 7188. $3,100, Intellectual property for a trailer.  
Flexisolutions Ltd  
Contact Bill Sharplin 06364 7188. $5,000, developing a multi-projectile.

Wellington  
Inifet Solutions Ltd  
Contact Anton Donde, 04 939 2263. $10,000, develop marketing strategies for knowledge management system.  
3D Achieve Ltd  
Contact Alison Brewer, 06 377 5803. $4,888, small business management software.  
Biza2z Ltd  
$2,250, development of business management system.

Canterbury  
Softech Design Ltd  
Contact Hugo Sandall, 021 488 654. $2,000, Developing an ergonomic computer mouse.  
Idea Unique  
Contact Richard Tattershaw, 03 366 5229. $5,519, develop international advertising and design agency.  
Geddes Manufacturing Ltd,  
Contact Luke Geddes, 03 377 9215. $10,000, new markets for TV and audio cabinets.

Otago  
Condensation Control Ltd  
Contact Paul Facoory, 03 488 2736. $2,813, air filter development for household ventilation.  
IBVT Networks Ltd  
Contact Michael Hodges, 03 471 8966. $6,266, Internet based information kiosks.