---
title: "Leftover Embryos - To be or not to be - what are the ethics?"
date: 2001-05-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10441
ministers:
  - Tariana Turia
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Child welfare legislation in New Zealand has always had the 'the best interests of the child' as a founding principle says Tariana Turia Associate Minister of Health and Social Services.

Recently there has been some discussion about the use of 'leftover embryos', which I have been concerned about. It seems to be an area where technology is out pacing ethics, such imbalance is not healthy.

"The application to have 'frozen embryos donated to childless couples' appears to me to negate 'the best interests of the child' principle.

"The action to seek ethical approval for the embryos to be donated appears more in the interests of adults than of children. That five couples are known 'to want to consider donating embryos' does not justify it occurring.

"I believe we need to give more serious thought to the social consequences of new reproductive technologies and the psychological implications for all family group members affected by it.

"What for example are the consequences of children not knowing their biological parents? For Maori, what are the implications of a major intervention in to and effectively a termination of whakapapa? What are the implications of trans ethnic implants? Would these be any different to same ethnic implants?

"Should we take this opportunity for dialogue to discuss, in depth, the implications of continuing the legal deception of people giving birth, as a result of implanted embryos, to children as if they were their own," Tariana Turia said.