---
title: "Support for principals a focus of education Budget"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10638
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The budget contains a significant investment in school principals, as part of the Government's commitment to improving the quality in schools.

Initiatives include the provision of 600 leased laptop computers a year.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard said new principals would have priority for the laptops, and would also participate in induction programmes.

"Many principals have described to me the struggle of the first few years. If principals are better prepared, we will have better schools and better learning. The Budget sets aside $27.4 million over four years, including $19 million of new funding, for Leadership and Management Development for principals.

"The package is practical and has been designed with input from working principals. It also includes funding for professional development guidance and an electronic principals network that provides access to examples of good practice," Trevor Mallard said

Other Budget initiatives to improve school quality and management include:

- $5.8 million over four years to help with planning and reporting changes. The changes, part of the Education Amendment Bill \[No 2], will improve the quality of teaching by making better information available to schools, government and parents.
- $17.1 million over four years on projects for better monitoring and an electronic administration system for schools. The changes will provide early detection of schools at risk and improve administration systems by taking advantage of computer technology.
- $9.1 million over four years for administrative support for small schools \[pre-Budget announcement].
- More than $15 million a year for implementation of the National Certificate in Educational Achievement \[NCEA].

This includes nearly $3 million of new funding next year to go towards the operation of the certificate; maintenance and development of standards and exemplars; teacher professional development; scholarship standards; and further assessment policy work.

"These are all initiatives that will ultimately help reduce workloads and improve the quality of teaching and learning in schools," Trevor Mallard said.