---
title: "Annette King to chair meeting meeting in Geneva"
date: 2001-05-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10522
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King will chair the meeting of Commonwealth Health Ministers in Geneva on Sunday prior to World Health Assembly meetings on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday next week.

At the Commonwealth Health Ministers' meeting, Mrs King will update ministers on preparation for the 13 Commonwealth Health Ministers' Meeting, which will be held in Christchurch in November.

The Geneva meeting on Sunday will also allow Commonwealth Ministers to discuss the WHA agenda and to clarify the Commonwealth's position on issues at the WHA meeting.

Mrs King will also chair a ministerial roundtable on barriers to mental health services at the WHA meeting, and will address the Assembly on New Zealand's recent mental health services experiences.

Following the WHA meeting, Mrs King will visit London briefly for meetings with United Kingdom health officials on primary health care and hospital issues. She will also meet officials from the National Institute of Clinical Excellence, and will have a two-hour meeting with Dr Euphemia McGoogan, senior lecturer in pathology at Lothian University Hospitals.

Dr McGoogan gave evidence at the Gisborne Cervical Screening Inquiry, and will be evaluating, at intervals of six months and one year, the Ministry of Health's progress in implementing the inquiry's recommendations.

Mrs King will also visit Ireland for four days as Racing Minister as well as Health Minister. She will have discussions with racing officials and prominent racing personalities, and will also meet health officials to discuss meningococcal disease.

The Minister will return to New Zealand in time for the Budget.