---
title: "Modern Apprenticeships working for Mäori"
date: 2001-05-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10533
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The Associate Minister of Education, the Hon Parekura Horomia said he is delighted that Maori are participating at such high levels in the Modern Apprenticeship scheme.

Mr Horomia made his comments while at the graduation ceremony of staff at the Watties Heinz Australasia plant in Hastings today, where more 250 earned nationally recognised qualifications.

The associate Education Minister said an evaluation report of the pilot phase of Modern Apprenticeship shows 20% (159) of Modern Apprentices are Mäori.

He said the report showed that nearly half of all Mäori Modern Apprentices are employed in the forestry industry, with significant numbers in engineering, carpentry and the wool harvesting industries.

Mr Horomia said he is pleased that young Mäori are taking up the training.

“There is evidence here that young Mäori who may not have necessarily considered careers in industry are now thinking about the benefits of being a Modern Apprentice. This is good news, and an exciting development in employment opportunities for Mäori.”

Modern Apprenticeships started last July and was aimed at increasing the number of young people on quality apprenticeships. Modern Apprenticeships was also to address skill shortages in key industries throughout New Zealand.

“The number of Maori participating in Modern Apprenticeships reflect the practical response of the Government to an identified need in the community and filling a gap in education and training pathways,” said Mr Horomia.