---
title: "Alliance Security and Opportunity package"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10643
ministers:
  - Jim Anderton
portfolios:
  - Deputy Prime Minister
---

Alliance contributions to the budget are centred on boosting security and opportunity, Deputy Prime Minister and Alliance leader Jim Anderton said.

"The Security and Opportunity package reflects the constructive input of our Coalition colleagues, but they are also policies that the Alliance members of the Government are particularly pleased to announce and to be associated with," Jim Anderton said.

Opportunity components include:  
\* * World Class New Zealanders, Creating a Culture of Success, and Supporting Promising Individuals, programmes to invest in talented New Zealanders.  
\* New and expanded industry and regional partnerships.  
\* Expanded programmes to grow small and medium businesses, major investment and major events.  
\* Greater support for businesses to win contracts from the New Zealand and Australian Governments through an expanded Industrial Supplies Office, announced by Economic Development Under-Secretary John Wright.  
\* A Jobs for Students initiative, full details of which will be announced in July.

Security components of the package include:  
\* A package of sentencing and parole reforms, rehabilitative measures aimed at reducing re-offending and funding for two new prisons, announced by Corrections Minister Matt Robson.  
\* A commitment to introduce paid parental leave in the next financial year, developed by Women's Affairs Minister Laila Harre.  
\* A youth suicide prevention strategy, announced by Laila Harre in her capacity as Youth Affairs Minister.  
\* Conservation Minister Sandra Lee's contribution to the Eco-2001 package to boost New Zealand environment and conservation security.

"The security and opportunity package in Budget 2001 shows that the Alliance has contributed good ideas. They have been achieved within a fiscally responsible budget which will produce more jobs and rising incomes" Jim Anderton said.