---
title: "Recruitment of Telecommunications Commissioner"
date: 2001-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10573
ministers:
  - Paul Swain
portfolios:
  - Communications and Information Technology
---

The government has begun the process of recruiting a Telecommunications Commissioner.

Communications Minister Paul Swain said advertisements for the position will appear both in New Zealand and overseas in the next few days.

"The closing date for applications will be 8 June," he said.

"We are looking for a person who can earn the respect of the telecommunications industry and generally be seen as impartial and fair.

"We want someone with a strong commercial orientation plus good understanding of competitive markets and an understanding of the critical issues faced by the telecommunications industry.

"The Telecommunications Commissioner will be an additional Commissioner within the Commerce Commission and will take particular responsibility for administering the new telecommunications legislation," Paul Swain said.

The Commission is also expected to employ extra staff to assist with the new telecommunications work.

The appointment of the Commissioner will be finalised when the telecommunications legislation is passed, which is expected to be in late September.

Job advert.

Telecommunications Commissioner

The Government of New Zealand is establishing the position of the Telecommunications Commissioner to introduce major regulatory reform into the New Zealand market. The Commissioner will play a key role in implementing new telecommunications regulatory functions under new telecommunications legislation.

This is a challenging opportunity, as the Commissioner will be implementing the first industry-specific regulation of the telecommunications sector in New Zealand. The Commissioner's roles are to make determinations to resolve disputes over regulated services, to monitor developments to ensure the scope of the regulation remains effective and efficient, to approve access codes prepared by an industry forum, and to determine the cost of the universal service obligation.

The Telecommunications Commissioner will be positioned within the Commerce Commission, a specialist tribunal responsible for promoting and protecting competition and fair trade in New Zealand markets.

We are seeking an outstanding individual with:  
· Experience at senior management level.  
· Strong intellectual skills and proven ability to deal with economic analysis.  
· A strong commercial orientation plus good understanding of competitive markets.  
· An understanding of the critical issues faced by the telecommunications industry.  
· Sound judgement and experience at working within statutory guidelines.  
· Effective decision making skills with the ability to work both independently and in consultation with others.

If this challenging and rewarding opportunity appeals to you:

Please send a curriculum vitae by Friday 8 June 2001 to

Lilias Bell at Bell McCaw Bampfylde Ltd  
Telephone 04 499 5051  
Email lilias@bmb.co.nz  
Post: P.O. Box 468  
Wellington