---
title: "Export Credit Office to open 1 July"
date: 2001-05-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10582
ministers:
  - Pete Hodgson
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

The Government's new export credit scheme will start operations on 1 July, Associate Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Pete Hodgson announced today.

The scheme will be run under the banner of the New Zealand Export Credit Office.

"This scheme is part of the Government's drive to improve export growth," Mr Hodgson said. "It has been developed following research and consultation with exporters showing that there are gaps in the export credit insurance market."

The scheme will provide export credit guarantees to support exporting firms with growth potential. It involves the Government working with the private sector to provide underwriting services for exporters who need finance between shipping an export order and being paid for delivery. The scheme provides a credit guarantee, rather than cash.

The Government has appointed Eksport Kredit Fonden (EKF) as its agent to operate the Export Credit Office (ECO). EKF is the Danish Government's export credit agency and was successful in an international tender.

"Export credit insurance is a specialised and complex business and we are pleased to have found an agent with EKF's expertise and experience," Mr Hodgson said.

The scheme is designed to work in partnership and share risk with existing private sector providers. The maximum liability the Government will accept through the scheme is limited to $350m. While this will be a contingent liability to the Crown, transactions will be priced to cover all costs.

"This scheme is another election promise kept," Mr Hodgson said. "New Zealand is again offering its exporters a basic measure of support that is available to exporters in nearly every other developed nation."

Trade New Zealand will provide information to exporters on export credits as well as specific details on the ECO and its operations. This will be through its website www.tradenz.govt.nz, hotline 0800 555 888 and a series of nationwide presentations.