---
title: "New houses and rent relief for Community Housing"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10655
ministers:
  - Mark Gosche
portfolios:
  - Housing
---

The community housing package in the budget will build at least 125 new houses and extend rent relief to cash-strapped community house tenants, Housing Ministers Mark Gosche and Tariana Turia announced today.

"We are continuing to provide safe, secure and affordable housing for some of our most vulnerable individuals and families," said Mr Gosche and MrsTuria.

"By working in partnership with communities we are seeking to build a stronger society and security for all New Zealanders."

There are currently more than 1,270 community houses nationwide such as emergency family houses, support housing for people with mental health needs and intellectual disabilities and women's refuges.

This year's budget includes a $19.5 million cash injection over four years that will enable Community Housing Ltd to boost stock numbers by at least 125 over the next four years.

The Government will also provide $4.5 million a year to help emergency and support housing groups who rent from Community Housing but who have difficulty meeting normal rent payments. This fund was introduced last December when $3 million was made available for the 2000-2001 year.

"Community housing provides shelter for families, those with intellectual, psychiatric and physical disabilities and others needing emergency support and safe refuge. Making sure housing is safe, affordable and secure is a priority for this Government," said Mr Gosche and Mrs Turia.