---
title: "Rakiura National Park - a jewel in the conservation estate"
date: 2001-05-11
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10505
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark said today that the gazetting of Rakiura National Park on Stewart Island would protect one of the most pristine areas of New Zealand wilderness for the enjoyment of future generations.

Helen Clark and Conservation Minister Sandra Lee visited Stewart Island today, where they announced the government's decision to accept recommendation by the New Zealand Conservation Authority to create the country's fourteenth national park, to be known as Rakiura National Park.

Helen Clark also officially opened an exhibition of work by selected artists who have spent time on the island.

"As a former Minister of Conservation, I am proud to be associated with today's announcement.

"Stewart Island is geologically and scientifically unique. Unlike so much of New Zealand's two main islands, very little of Stewart/Rakiura Island has been modified by human impact. This makes the island an untouched jewel in the conservation estate.

"The creation of the new national park will bring 85 per cent of the total land area of the island under a single management system, enabling a much more efficient system of protecting Rakiura's unique conservation values."

The Rakiura Art exhibition at the Stewart Island Community Centre opened today by the Prime Minister is a joint venture project initiated by the Southland Art Foundation, the Southland Museum and Art Gallery and the Department of Conservation.

The project provided for a voyage last year around Rakiura for a group of artists. The pieces of work inspired by the voyage feature in the exhibition.

"The power of the island's natural environment to inspire and enlighten people is encapsulated in the work of the artists," Helen Clark said.

"Their work is a fitting celebration of the designation of the island as a national park. I congratulate the artists themselves, and the work of the Southland Museum and Art Gallery, the Southland Arts Foundation and the Department of Conservation in supporting them," Helen Clark said.

Contact: David Lewis, press secretary, 021 409 492