---
title: "Budget to fund development of export education industry"
date: 2001-05-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10563
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Funding is to be provided in next week's Budget to kick start the implementation of a new export education strategy, Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey said today.

Export education currently contributes around $700m annually to New Zealand's GDP - more than our wine industry - and has the potential to grow over $1b annually within three to four years. Funding was provided in last year's Budget to develop a strategy with the industry to achieve its potential. Mr Maharey said a further $1.3m will be provided in the coming financial year for development, marketing and quality monitoring activities. It is expected that industry development activities will become self-funding via an industry levy from 2002/03 onwards.

"New Zealand's export education industry has grown quickly in recent years and can expand further.

"Although the number of international students studying here is lower than in other countries we have a bigger proportion of international students relative to our domestic roll than the US, the biggest player in this industry.

"The purpose of the strategy is to expand the industry in New Zealand in a way our education institutions can handle.

"The New Zealand export education industry can count on the active support of the Government as it develops.

"Already the Prime Minister has taken representatives on overseas trade missions and we have enlisted the support of Trade Negotiations Minister Jim Sutton and Foreign Affairs Minister Phil Goff. Education Minister Trevor Mallard is working within the school sector. A revised and strengthened Code of Practice for International Students will come into force following the passage of education legislation currently before Parliament," Steve Maharey said.