---
title: "PM to attend Cook Is celebration of 100 years association with NZ"
date: 2001-05-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10707
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark announced today that she will attend the Cook Islands' celebration of its one hundred years of association with New Zealand on 11 June.

The Prime Minister will lead a delegation which includes Maori Affairs Minister Parekura Horomia, MPs Winnie Laban and Arthur Anae, and the Maori Queen, Dame Te Atairangikaahu.

Young New Zealanders will be represented by Palmerston North's Hinurewa Poutu, winner of the national Nga Manu Korero speech competition, and Tapaeru Rerei Akariri, leader of the Cook Islands Performing Arts Group at Tangaroa College, which recently won the Cook Islands section of the Secondary Schools Polynesian Festival.

A performance group from Whitireia Polytechnic will perform at the celebrations.

Helen Clark said that 11 June 1901 was the date on which the Cook Islands were incorporated as part of New Zealand.

"In addition to attending the celebrations, I will be meeting with the Queen's Representative, the Prime Minister, ministers, the Leader of the Opposition, and MPs.

"The centenary of formal relations between New Zealand and the Cook Islands is an opportunity to reaffirm the close ties between us.

"Dr Maoate and I will sign a Joint Centenary Declaration of the Principles of the Relationship between New Zealand and the Cook Islands, which restates the principles of the relationship of free association as they apply in the modern context," Helen Clark said.