---
title: "Opportunities for Manawatu from defence decisions"
date: 2001-05-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10612
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Defence
---

There are regional development opportunities for the Manawatu region arising from today's defence announcements, said Minister of Defence Mark Burton.

"There will be spare capacity at RNZAF bases when the air combat force is disbanded. Consolidating the Air Force at Ohakea is one option.

"The situation also provides opportunities for joint military-civilian airfields in support of regional economic development. There has already been some local interest expressed in developing Ohakea along these lines.

"The Government therefore intends to commission a study to examine the possibility of opening up Ohakea and operating it as a joint military/civilian facility. If it goes ahead, regional exporters would benefit. It could create new jobs and economic growth in the region.

"This study is designed to lead to a process for local authorities, regional business leaders, the Air Force, and the Government to work together to fully realise the potential of Ohakea.

"In the meantime, the planned $20 million upgrade of the runway at Ohakea will proceed.

"The modernisation of the Army also opens up new possibilities for the Manawatu region," Mark Burton said.

"There will be downstream benefits from having a modern, mechanised battalion based at Linton Army camp, in the area of commercial support for on-going maintenance and other support functions."

Mark Burton said that implementation of the Government's decision to disband the air combat force would be carefully managed.

"Managing the impact on RNZAF staff based at Ohakea is a high priority task for Chief of Defence Force, Chief of Air Staff and for me. The Skyhawks, their pilots, and all those employed to sustain their operation have served New Zealand well," Mark Burton said.