---
title: "Cultural sector in great shape one year on from Cultural Recovery Package"
date: 2001-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10577
ministers:
  - http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/tizard/arts/index.html
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

The benefits of the Cultural Recovery Package are becoming evident right across New Zealand, says Judith Tizard, Associate Minister of Arts, Culture and Heritage.

Today marks the first anniversary of the announcement of the $86 million injection to the cultural sector by Prime Minister and Minister of Arts, Culture and Heritage, Helen Clark. (The package included ongoing funding increases of over $20million a year in each of the following three years, above the initial injection).

"The Government's Cultural Recovery Package signalled a new beginning for the way New Zealanders regard the arts," says Judith Tizard. "Until last year, the previous Government and many New Zealanders saw the arts as a luxury, and as something we do in our spare time.

"The truth is we are becoming a creative country, and it's clear that the arts will be a significant part of the way New Zealanders make a living in the future.

"The Cultural Recovery Package was designed to stabilise the cultural sector, so that it can develop into a viable industry. In some cases, the grants were simply to help organisations out of the financial crisis they had fallen into under the previous Government.

"I'm delighted to be hearing from around the country that the package has been life-changing to many of the recipients.

"When you break the $86 million down, there are thousands of individuals benefiting from this financial stability – through a combination of better arts management, more stable employment and greater economic prospects."

Gary Nicholas of Toi Maori told Judith Tizard the $613,000 received via Creative New Zealand was a "tremendous boost in confidence. The ten national bodies that make up the Toi Maori collective can now plan with confidence over a period of ten years, instead of lurching from 12 months to 12 months."

Robert McDougall Art Gallery Director Tony Preston told the Minister that the progress made on the new Christchurch Art Gallery has been fantastic. "We are blissfully happy. We are heading resolutely into a very rosy future, and we are extraordinarily grateful for the $6.474 million we received in the package."

Meanwhile, Penny Eames of Arts Access Aotearoa, which also received funding through the package, says the injection has "increased the capacity to provide quality support towards positioning the arts as a major part of New Zealand's business sector."

After informally surveying various groups that received funding in the Cultural Recovery Package, Judith Tizard says she is looking forward to the continuing growth of the arts sector into a healthy and vibrant industry.

**Royal New Zealand Ballet**: A surplus of $887,000 in its 2000 Annual Report has enabled the Ballet to plan future seasons with stability and security.

**Music Industry Commission**: The Commission-organised New Zealand Music Month is a huge success; the Commission has been holding a series of seminars across the country focusing on music as a business; and it has made progress in the areas of Maori and Pacific Island music.

**Auckland Theatre Company**: With new multi-year funding from Creative NZ, ATC has been able to implement its "2econd Unit" initiative, to develop professional talent and produce new New Zealand work.

**New Zealand Symphony Orchestra**: Extra operational funding has enabled the Orchestra to plan a substantially increased programme of activity, including touring to a number of smaller centres around the country which have not seen the Orchestra very often. The Orchestra has also been able to make a bigger commitment to education and outreach programmes.

**NZ on Air – Music**: The Phase Four scheme of NZ on Air's music funding programme enables more New Zealand musicians to receive funding for a variety of purposes, including high-quality recordings, and increased staffing means NZ on Air can bring NZ music to the attention of more radio and TV programmers.

**NZ on Air – Television**: Several children's drama projects, including "Being Eve", are currently in development; South Pacific Pictures has employed between 100-150 people for the crews of "Being Eve" and new Maori drama series "Mataku", and there has been significant international buyer interest in "Being Eve".

**Radio New Zealand**: Radio NZ has a number of new programmes going to air in June, including the week-night live arts programme, "What's Going On?", and the new Sunday programme, "Sunday Morning".

*For more information on the Cultural Recovery Package visit the Government website: [http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/tizard/arts/index.html](http://www.executive.govt.nz/minister/tizard/arts/index.html)*