---
title: "Guidelines for contracting with NGOs"
date: 2001-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10580
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - State Services
---

The Government has taken a major step towards establishing a closer relationship with the community and voluntary sector with the release of government guidelines on contracting with Non-Government Organisations (NGOs).

Associate Finance Minister Trevor Mallard said the Guidelines for Contracting with Non-Government Organisations on Behalf of the Crown were drafted by Treasury after consultation with a number of government department and more than 30 NGOs.

"The Government wants to see a significant improvement in the management of contractual relationships between government agencies and NGOs," Trevor Mallard said.

"The guidelines will promote a mature and constructive relationship with the community and voluntary sector. They complement the recent report from the working party on relationships with the community and voluntary sector.

"During the extensive consultation process, the clear message came through that many NGOs have been frustrated with the way Government agencies contract with them. The contract forms only one part of the wider relationship between government agencies and NGOs - and in fact should be seen as only one step in building the relationship. The Guidelines reflect the need for the Crown to act in good faith, and to understand the nature of the organisations it's contracting with - particularly with respect to the autonomy and independence of these organisations.

"However, we also want to make sure that there is appropriate accountability for public money. Contracts should represent value for money for the taxpayer, and help the government to achieve its objectives - as well as those of the NGO. They should also reflect the needs of the ultimate recipients of the service.

"The Guidelines are not mandatory, as government agencies need scope to negotiate contracts that are appropriate to a wide variety of relationships and NGOs.

"Nevertheless, agencies will be expected to stick to the best practice outlined in the Guidelines, unless there are good reasons otherwise. The Audit Office will be able to refer to the Guidelines when examining contractual issues between government agencies and NGOs the Minister said. Government agencies are being asked to check their contacting processes in the light of the Guidelines.

"To make sure they're working, the Guidelines and their effectiveness will be reviewed by officials in consultation with NGOs, and reported back to Cabinet by October 2002," Trevor Mallard said.

The Guidelines will be issued to all government departments and most Crown entities. They will apply to contracting relationships with profit-making bodies supplying services sought by the Crown as well as the community and voluntary sector.

Copies of the Guidelines are available at www.treasury.govt.nz.