---
title: "Full service Education for AIMHI Schools"
date: 2001-05-25
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10685
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The nine AIMHI secondary schools have received money in the Budget to pilot full service education on site.

Yesterday's Budget included $2.5 million over four years for the schools to integrate social, health, and education services.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard visited Otahuhu College, the AIMHI cluster lead school, today to make the announcement.

"This is aimed at improving both education and wider social and health outcomes for students," Trevor Mallard.

"A key objective of AIMHI is to raise student achievement. It recognises that there are a whole range of factors that need to be considered for that goal to be realised. The full service education is part of that.

"Schools provide a good access point for health of social service initiatives because young people are required to attend schools at all times. It has the added benefit for the professionals in that they will be able to work together and share their knowledge.

"Improved access to core services for young people can provide speedy responses to health and welfare issues. It will provide for early interventions which can reduce the incidence of adverse outcomes."

Trevor Mallard said the pilot will start from January next year and will vary from school to school.

The AIMHI schools are: Hillary College, McAuley High School, Mangere College, Southern Cross Senior School, Otahuhu College, Porirua College, De La Salle College, Tamaki College and Tangaroa College.