---
title: "PM to visit Korea and Greece"
date: 2001-05-07
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10466
ministers:
  - Helen Clark
portfolios:
  - Prime Minister
---

Prime Minister Helen Clark today announced the dates for her visit to Korea and Greece.

"My visit to Korea, from 13 to 16 May, will focus on the opportunities New Zealand has to expand economic, education and other links with one of Asia's biggest and most dynamic economies.

"In many ways the profile of New Zealand's dealings with Korea has similarities with that we had with Japan twenty years ago - and with a similar scope for expansion.

"Korea is currently our fifth biggest export market. Much of this trade, however, is commodity-based and therefore subject to the sort of downturn and fluctuations seen during the 1997 'Asian Crisis', when our exports to Korea dropped by forty per cent.

"I will be meeting with President Kim Dae Jung and other ministers, the Leader of the Opposition, business interests, and women leaders.

"As with the recent visit to Japan and China, a delegation of business people drawn from those sectors with the potential to benefit substantially from a deeper economic relationship with Korea will be accompanying me.

"The delegation includes Rick Christie, chair of the Science and Innovation Advisory Committee; Carter Holt Harvey CEO Chris Liddell; and CEO of Tourism New Zealand, George Hickton.

"Koreans have a very high regard for further education. This is an area where New Zealand's relationship can be developed in ways beneficial to both countries and can increase our people-to-people contacts. Auckland University has already forged strong links with Seoul National University and I hope other institutions will be able to follow its lead.

"New Zealand's most enduring ties with Korea, based on our participation in the Korean War and our support for the development of democracy in Korea, will not be neglected on my trip there.

"I will visit the National War Museum to honour the 43 New Zealanders who died during the war. In Kwangju, the home province of President Kim, I will lay a wreath at a memorial commemorating the victims of the 18 May 1980 massacre of pro-democracy demonstrators. The far-reaching effect of that tragedy ultimately led to Korea's shift to democracy."

On 17 and 18 May the Prime Minister and a small delegation of business people will visit Athens, before attending the sixtieth anniversary commemorations of the Battle of Crete from 18 to 20 May.

Meetings will be held with Greece's President, the Prime Minister and other ministers, and with business interests.

"The Greek Prime Minister, Mr Simitis, participates, as I do, in the 'Progressive Governance' group of government leaders which met last year in Berlin and New York, and will meet again in Stockholm in September.

"The presence of a small but active Greek community in New Zealand and the emotional bonds forged by New Zealand's participation in the Battle of Crete, and earlier in the defence of the Greek mainland, are all important elements in our relationship with that country..

"On Crete I will be joined by veterans of the battle, the four winners of the student essay competition, an NZDF honour guard, and a Maori concert group. The programme includes official New Zealand, Greek, Australian and Commonwealth ceremonies and battlefield visits," Helen Clark said.

Contact: Mark Watts, press secretary, 021 822 734

Business delegation to Korea from New Zealand:

Rick Christie (head of the delegation)  
CEO, Rangatira Ltd  
Chair, Science and Innovation Advisory Council

Professor Raewyn Dalziel  
Deputy Vice Chancellor, University of Auckland

Craig Ellison  
Chairman Moana Pacific  
Deputy Chairman Te Ohu Kai Moana (Treaty of Waitangi Fisheries Commission)

Mr Joe La Grouw  
Executive Chairman, La Grouw Corporation Ltd (encompassing Lockwood and Initial Homes)

George Hickton  
CEO, Tourism New Zealand

Chris Liddell  
CEO, Carter Holt Harvey

Michael Park  
Managing Director, LM Rankine Trading Co Ltd  
Managing Director, Park Shipping Services

Dr Keith Steele  
CEO, AgResearch Ltd

Delegation travelling to Greece from New Zealand:

Ross Armstrong,  
Chair, NZ Post and TVNZ

Gary Monk  
CEO, Intersea Seafoods