---
title: "NCEA information campaign"
date: 2001-05-28
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10705
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Year 10 students and their parents will soon be receiving detailed information about the new secondary school qualification system, which comes into force next year.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard today announced the commencement of the NCEA information campaign. He visited students at Wellington Girls' College to show them advance copies of the booklet and explained main features of the new qualification, to replace School Certificate in 2002.

“There will still be end of year exams in the regular curriculum subjects and skills that can’t be assessed in an exam will be assessed by the school," Trevor Mallard said.

"That means a little more internal assessment in most subjects. Overall about 40% will be internally assessed, but in some subjects it’s as little as 20%. Many people worry unduly about internal assessment. When you look at the achievement standards, you see that internal assessment is for skills like speaking, research and laboratory work. Plenty of sample assessment activities will be available for teachers to use or adapt and NZQA has a tried and proven system for checking assessments and advising schools. They are actually doing it this year."

Trevor Mallard said there would be a range of NCEA information that will be available for students, families and the public in the next few months.

“By the time students have to choose their courses for 2002, I am confident that students and their families will have a clear understanding of NCEA. The material coming out of NZQA is attractive and accessible. It will be an excellent starting point, from which schools will be able to build confidence in NCEA.”

"The NCEA booklet and a leaflet will be delivered to the 55,000 Year 10 students and their families by the end of June. Newspaper and radio advertising in July will tell the public about the main features of NCEA and invite them to call an 0800 number for more information, including copies of the booklet. All of this material will be in English and te reo Maori. There will be leaflets in Pacific and Asian languages.

“By the end of June, a new NCEA Internet site will be a key source of information for both the public and teaching professionals. From that site, hosted by NZQA, you will be able to link to sample exam papers, sample internal assessments, marking schedules and the national standards themselves.

“All of this information highlights the two most exciting features of NCEA - the excellent student profile shown by the NCEA results notice, and the enhanced flexibility for schools to offer broader and deeper learning for all students," Trevor Mallard said.