---
title: "Government services for rural New Zealand boosted"
date: 2001-05-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10525
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

Government services are being brought closer again to people in rural areas with the opening of Heartland Services centres across provincial New Zealand, says Social Services and Employment Minister Steve Maharey and Minister for Rural Affairs Jim Sutton.

Mr Maharey opened the first Heartland Services Centre in Dargaville today which is to be based from the Department of Work and Income premises in Normanby Street. The Centre will serve the Kaipara district and is the first of approximately 10 Heartland Services Centres planned to be established in provincial locations around the country before Christmas this year. $2.27m is to be provided in the Budget to establish and staff the centres over the next four years.

“Heartland Services is a new government initiative which restores face to face access to a range of government services in provincial communities. Over recent years small towns across the country have experienced a flight of government services.

“People in rural areas experience significant difficulties accessing government services because of poor telephone coverage and lack of public transport.

"Heartland Service Centre coordinators will provide the link between local people making enquiries, and government agencies. A public telephone and computer is provided at each centre and the coordinator can help with general enquiries, including accessing government websites for job searches and other information.

"Government services most in demand in the Kaipara area included benefits and pensions, employment, childcare and protection, rental housing, tax and family assistance, Maori land issues and accident compensation. The centre offers a one-stop shop in a convenient location.

“Heartland Service centres make links to these agencies a whole lot easier, friendlier and better coordinated,” the Ministers said.

Apart from DWI and Child, Youth and Family, Heartland Services in Dargaville will involve ACC, Housing New Zealand, Inland Revenue and the Maori Land Court. Representatives from these agencies will be at the Centre at scheduled times, where possible synchronising their visits for the convenience of those using the service.

The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will also use the Heartland Services Centre for disseminating information. Other Government Departments have also been invited to participate.

As it develops, its is hoped the role of the Service Centre may be expanded to serve as a community resource centre, supporting community and voluntary agencies in the area when they need photocopy, facsimile, training and meeting facilities.