---
title: "Administrative help for small schools"
date: 2001-05-17
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10565
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

The Government has signalled a commitment to long term increased administration support for small schools.

Education Minister Trevor Mallard told the rural and teaching principals conference in Nelson today that next week's Budget allowed for specific support for improved administration in small schools.

"This year's Budget will allow $1 million to run some more school administration support cluster projects," Trevor Mallard said.

"About half the country's small rural schools have already been involved and the extra money will allow more than 100 new schools to participate.

" What I am even more pleased about, is that I have managed to secure ongoing funding in the out years. There is a commitment of $2.7 million a year to help in administration for small rural schools.

"The experiences of schools that have taken part in the cluster projects will be used to develop how best to use that funding."

Trevor Mallard said an evaluation report just released showed the clusters had made a difference to principal and board workloads.

"Eighty-six percent of principals said that their involvement in a cluster reduced their workload and 77 percent said it also reduced their board members' workload. That in itself indicates a success.

"What is particularly pleasing is that the willingness of members to share information, resources and personnel was critical to the success of the projects. It is that kind of co-operation that will also help teaching and learning in our schools," Trevor Mallard said.