---
title: "Report shows second-hand smoke makes you sick"
date: 2001-05-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10767
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Evidence backing the need for better protection for second-hand smokers is building rapidly, Health Minister Annette King said today (Thursday, 31 May 2001)

"Last year we released a research report which estimated that nearly 400 deaths each year were attributable to second-hand smoke. More recently the findings of a study investigating the effect of smoke on bar and restaurant workers reinforced the need for stronger measures to protect restaurant and bar workers from exposure to second-hand smoke. Now we have further evidence showing that illness due to second-hand smoke is substantial," said Mrs King.

Mrs King was commenting on the findings of a report, "Morbidity attributable to second-hand smoke in New Zealand", commissioned by the Ministry of Heath. The report was written by Professor Alistair Woodward, Wellington School of Medicine, and tobacco researcher Dr Murray Laugesen.

"The findings in this latest report are significant," said Mrs King. "Not only does second-hand smoke have a major impact on childhood illnesses such as asthma, meningococcal disease, glue ear and respiratory infections, there are also significant effects on adults."

Financially, the direct hospital costs attributable to second-hand smoke is estimated to be $8.7 million each year.

"This figure, combined with the estimated 388 deaths each year attributable to second-hand smoke, on top of the 4700 smokers who die each year from smoking related illness, all add strength to calls for enhanced protection from second-hand smoke," said Mrs King.

"This Government has already indicated its commitment to help people quit smoking, with the announcement of over $11 million per annum additional funding for nicotine replacement therapy and cessation help in the 2000 Budget. Now we have further evidence which will support our call to introduce measures to protect people from the risk of second-hand smoke."