---
title: "No ideas and no vision for education from National - Maharey"
date: 2001-05-06
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10469
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

National's tertiary education taskforce report makes it clear the party has no fresh ideas and no vision for tertiary education, says Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey.

The report's key new idea that the student loan scheme should be renamed the student 'advances' scheme will be treated with derision by students and the public, while the plan to flood New Zealand's tertiary institutions one-for-one with full fee-paying foreign students would see the system losing any ability to focus on the needs of our economy and society.

"National has shown itself to be the party devoid of ideas and completely unable to think through the consequences of its so-called vision.

"No one will be fooled by the plan to rename the student loan scheme. Nor will the grand vision to deregulate the tertiary education system and it flood one-for-one with 200,000 overseas students do anything to build the skills we need for the knowledge society.

"The report reveals that Maurice Williamson has no support inside his own party. He says he wants to build political consensus around the Government's moves to develop a strategic and coordinated framework for all post-school education. His views contrast starkly with the deregulation agenda the tasforce recommends.

"The Government has put considerable effort and resources into developing our export education industry since we came to office. We are planning for a steady rise in the number of foreign students studying here in a way we can manage. Our plan will see the current 35,000 foreign students studying in New Zealand grow to around 70,000 over the coming four to five years.

"National's plan would see our entire system reorienting itself to focus on the needs of the full fee-paying foreign students they want to flood our institutions with. Interestingly, the emphasis within the industry is now shifting to educating overseas students in their country of origin using new technologies and New Zealand-developed course materials.

"Employers are crying out for the Government to refocus tertiary institutions on educating New Zealanders to meet the needs of our economy and society. National would have them abandon this vital nation building role in favour of attracting and meeting the needs of students from other countries," Steve Maharey said.