---
title: "Extra funding firms up Police baselines"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10660
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Police
---

The Minister of Police, George Hawkins, today welcomed the allocation of an additional $165.5 million to the New Zealand Police over the next four years.

Police baselines will be boosted by $42.4 million in the 2001-02 financial year with an extra $40.8 million in 2002-03, $41 million in 2003-04 and $41.3 million in 2004-05.

"Last year this Government made a clear commitment to strong funding for law and order" said Mr Hawkins. "That commitment is ongoing and important.

"The increase will ensure that the Police Commissioner has the resources to maintain existing operations, as well as the ability to roll out the many new initiatives introduced under the Labour Alliance Government.

For example, Police have already earmarked $3.6 million over four years for ESR (forensic) services to ensure it can continue to provide a timely and high quality service to police in crime solving," said Mr Hawkins.

Police would also continue to benefit from the substantial injection in last year's budget of $52 million per annum and from law and order initiatives including $13.6 million to fight burglary and $9.7 million for youth justice, both over the next three years.

On top of this was the $126 million in last year's Budget for road safety.

I have already had many opportunities to congratulate the Police since I became Minister" said Mr Hawkins. "They have brought crime down, improved resolution rates and reduced burglary rates to an 18 year low. I will make sure that Police have the tools and equipment they need to continue successfully cracking down on criminals