---
title: "Minister Pleased With Response to Gaming Review"
date: 2001-05-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10415
ministers:
  - George Hawkins
portfolios:
  - Internal Affairs
---

The Minister of Internal Affairs, George Hawkins, says he is pleased that over 1000 submissions have been received in response to the discussion document which was released as part of the Government's Gaming Review. Submissions on the Review closed yesterday.

The gaming discussion document was released in February and called for submissions on a number of issues surrounding the regulation of gaming, including:

· what role gaming should play in our society  
· what effect internet gambling has on New Zealand  
· what effect technological change has on gaming, and whether it is possible to regulate cross-border gaming.

"The discussion document was designed to gather the views of the wide cross-section of New Zealanders who have an interest in gambling" said Mr Hawkins. "I am impressed that over 1000 submissions have been processed and there are yet more to count. That is a great response."

Mr Hawkins said the next step in the Gaming Review is a careful analysis of all submissions by the Department. "I am looking forward to discovering what opinions New Zealanders hold on the regulation of gaming and why."

Mr Hawkins said that once submissions have been analysed, the Government intends to make decisions on gaming by July, and introduce a bill to Parliament by the end of this year. The intention is to enact new legislation by March 2002.

Contact: Press Secretary, Aimee Wilkins, Phone 04 4719795 or 021 270 9131, aimee.wilkins@parliament.govt.nz