---
title: "E-Learning Advisory Group to be appointed"
date: 2001-05-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10484
ministers:
  - Steve Maharey
portfolios:
  - Education
---

An expert group will be appointed to advise the Government on how New Zealand's tertiary education institutions can take advantage of new learning technologies, Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey said today.

Flexible learning systems have created new access points into learning. Considerable activity is taking place in e-learning throughout the tertiary education system. The Government wants to encourage collaboration among providers and support further e-learning developments.

Mr Maharey said he was seeking 7-9 experts from the tertiary education and ICT sectors who have developed capability and expertise in various forms of flexible learning to work together over the next four months.

"It is vital that all New Zealanders have the opportunity to develop the knowledge and skills needed to succeed in a high technology world.

"E-learning gives potential learners greater flexibility about what, where, when and how they access tertiary education.

"I am appointing a small, expert advisory group to consider the steps we need to take to ensure high standards are met and to identify the barriers preventing the development of e-learning opportunities.

"The Advisory Group and the Ministry of Education are due to report to me before the end of this year, and I have tagged some funding in the coming Budget to begin putting in place the recommendations," Steve Maharey said.