---
title: "He Korowai Oranga - Maori Health Strategy discussion document released"
date: 2001-05-01
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10403
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Ministers Annette King and Tariana Turia today launched 'He Korowai Oranga' the draft Maori Health Strategy, outlining directions the Labour Alliance government will take to reduce inequalities.

"These issues are priorities for District Health Boards in the New Zealand Health Strategy which I launched late last year. This document details those and other areas which we want boards to focus on, to improve the health of all New Zealanders. We now have a Maori Health Strategy to sit alongside that document, setting out the ways in which health gains can be achieved for whanau, hapu, iwi and Maori communities," Mrs King said today.

He Korowai Oranga, the draft Maori Health Strategy, has been developed as a discussion document by the Ministry of Health after extensive consultation with other Government agencies, Maori health providers and consumers and input from a Sector Reference Group.

Mrs Turia said, "He Korowai Oranga supports whanau, hapu, iwi and Maori communities' aspirations to take control of their own health development. Hapu development relies on the ability of whanau to drive their development. The strategy has an overall aim, whanau ora, or healthy families, and outlines pathways for improving the wellbeing of all our whanau. I am keen to see the development of a skilled Maori health workforce that will assist whanau and hapu to achieve their development aspirations."

Mrs Turia said, "This government's integrated approach to development, of which He Korowai Oranga is a part, will support hapu development approaches, just as healthy houses can affirm healthy lifestyles, which result in healthy whanau."

Hui will be now held throughout the country allowing whanau, hapu, iwi, Maori communities, Maori providers, District Health Boards, health and disability organisations and individuals to contribute to the final strategy.

"This discussion document outlines plans to develop guidelines to assist District Health Boards to establish partnerships with iwi and other relationships with Maori. We also want to increase the proportion of Maori at all levels of the health and disability workforce" Mrs King said.

The Ministers said performance measures as well as processes for monitoring and evaluating the strategy would be included in the final document.