---
title: "Government acknowledges role of Greens"
date: 2001-05-10
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10517
ministers:
  - Sandra Lee
portfolios:
  - Conservation
---

The government today acknowledged the role the Green Party played in developing Budget initiatives announced in the Eco 2001 package.

Agriculture Minister Jim Sutton, Conservation Minister Sandra Lee and Associate Biosecurity Minister Marian Hobbs said four of the measures announced today were either initiated or promoted by the Green Party.

The policies were a public awareness programme for conservation, national minimum standards for organic production, a small growers' organic development programme and a South Island survey for freshwater pest fish.

The ministers said the permanent awareness programme built on a Green Budget initiative from last year.

The conservation awareness programme has a $10 million budget over the next four years.

The two funding initiatives for organics will help establish a set of minimum standards for organic farming and assist small growers' towards certification.  
The total budget for 2001/02 is $250,000.

The pest fish survey will investigate whether it is feasible to eradicate two unwanted fish species in the South Island - koi carp and gambusia.

"We are pleased that these important environmental measures have emerged from the consultation between the government and the Green Party over the 2001 Budget.

"They underline the importance the Labour-Alliance government and the Green Party attaches to protecting the environment," Jim Sutton, Sandra Lee and Marian Hobbs said.