---
title: "Minister releases National Alcohol Strategy"
date: 2001-05-20
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10594
ministers:
  - Tariana Turia
portfolios:
  - Health
---

ACTING HEALTH Minister Tariana Turia today launched the Government's National Alcohol Strategy, calling for government and non-government agencies, the wider community and individuals to work together to help minimise alcohol-related harm.  
This document serves as the Government’s action plan to target alcohol-related harm. It outlines key outcome targets, strategies that will be implemented over time, and the monitoring framework.  
"Everyone has a stake in making this strategy work, and everyone can benefit if it does," said Tariana Turia. "I encourage people to work together to bring this strategy to life and help minimise the alcohol-related harm that currently impacts on our lives.  
"While many people manage to drink alcohol without harming themselves or others, the fact remains that misuse of alcohol results in considerable health, social and economic costs, which are borne by individuals, families and the wider community.

"Whether it be physical harm, mental health problems, injury and death on the roads, drownings, violence, fetal abnormalities, absenteeism and impaired work performance, the social costs of alcohol misuse in New Zealand are estimated to be between $1.5-billion and $2.4-billion.  
"This strategy aims to help minimise alcohol-related harm in New Zealand. While we have already made some progress, the costs still remain too high.  
"This Government is committed to reducing alcohol-related harm and has instituted a range of responses. Guidelines have been developed to place limits on the marketing of alcohol - alcoholic sodas in particular - to ensure that manufacturers and retailers do not target young people.  
"These initiatives support ongoing approaches to target alcohol-related harm. For example, the excise tax on alcohol, the purchase of alcohol health education and promotion materials by the Ministry of Health and the Alcohol Advisory Council, drink driving initiatives which are impacting on New Zealand’s road toll, and enforcement activities by health protection officers and the New Zealand Police," said Ms Turia.