---
title: "Judith Tizard announces results of NZ Music Quiz"
date: 2001-05-16
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10555
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

Judith Tizard has awarded prizes to her colleagues after testing them on their knowledge of New Zealand music.

"I was quite pleased with the results of the questionnaire," says Judith Tizard. "Though many MPs were understandably too busy to do the quiz, those who did have a go showed a general interest in the music around them, especially when they were asked about the last album they bought."

"The point of the exercise was to get them thinking about the fantastic popular music on offer in this country during New Zealand Music Month. I plan to test them on a regular basis long after the month is over so that their awareness of New Zealand music stays at a high level."

Awards went to:

Willie Jackson - "Best Music Industry Insider" (19/20)  
Prize: "Goddess - Various Artists"

Trevor Mallard - "Best +45" (18/20)  
Prize: "Home Grown in Upper Hutt - Various Artists"

Lianne Dalziel, Katherine Rich - "Best -45" (18/20)  
Prize: "Flying Way Too High - Arclife Compilation" (Lianne Dalziel)  
"Gathering 2000 - New Electronica from Aotearoa" (Katherine Rich)

Georgina te Heuheu - "Bravest Attempt" (0/20, with a plea that though she didn't know the answers to these questions, she is a strong NZ music lover)  
Prize: "A Nipple for your Trouble? - Manic Opera live at Whangarei"

Jim Anderton - "Shihad Award" (for writing "Jihad")  
Prize: "The Bride of Brat - Brat Volume 2"

The question "What was the last NZ album you bought?" exposed a wide range of musical tastes amongst Parliamentarians. Answers included:

Neil Finn's solo albums "Try Whistling This" and "One Nil", the Dobbyn-Runga-Finn live album "Together in Concert", "Permanence" by Gramsci, Phil Toms' "Storm Warning", Dean Hapeta's latest "Ko Te Matakahi Kupu", Tadpole's debut album "The Buddhafinger", Hinewehi Mohi's "Oceania", Ruia and Ranea Aperahama's album "He Takoha", Shihad's "The General Electric", the NZSO-Split Enz collaboration, and Carl Doig's "Piano by Candlelight",

Judith Tizard bought the newest albums by Cloudboy, Neil Finn, Topp Twins, Nathan Haines, and another copy of Zed's album, after giving the last one away as a gift. The last gig Judith Tizard went to was Nathan Haines in Dunedin at the beginning of the month.

"New Zealand Music Month isn't over yet, so there is still plenty that we can do to show our support for the work of the Music Industry Commission, NZ on Air and the many others who make and promote New Zealand music," says Judith Tizard.

The prizes were donated from Judith Tizard's extensive CD collection, with thanks to the respective record labels and Roger Marbeck of Marbeck's Records in Auckland.