---
title: "Dalziel to head APEC delegation to Beijing"
date: 2001-05-11
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10531
ministers:
  - Lianne Dalziel
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Associate Minister of Education Lianne Dalziel will head a 15-member New Zealand delegation to the APEC High Level Meeting on Human Capacity Building in Beijing next week, from 14-16 May.

The meeting will bring together representatives of governments, business and the education and training sector from throughout the Asia Pacific region.

Lianne Dalziel said the Beijing meeting was a valuable opportunity to talk about New Zealand's achievements and learn from the experience of other APEC economies.

"The theme of the meeting - building human capacity - highlights the need not only to transform our economies but also to ensure that this change benefits all people.

"New Zealand has an extensive programme of work underway to build human capacity, including a recent review of industry training, new initiatives for adult literacy training, the introduction of information and communication technologies in schools, and the management of the flow of skilled workers between countries.  
There are also a number of local initiatives in Maori and Pacific communities, which are being led by Te Puni Kokiri and the Ministry of Pacific Islands Affairs."

Lianne Dalziel welcomed the representation of government, business and education leaders in the New Zealand delegation.

" At last year's meeting in Brunei, APEC leaders recognised the new economy is largely being driven by creativity and innovation in the business and education sectors. It is essential for governments to work in partnership with businesses, educators and trainers to make the most of the most valuable resource we have - our people."

The meeting is a significant event for the People's Republic of China during its year as chair of APEC. The attendance of the Chinese President and Vice Premier highlights the importance of the occasion.

His Excellency Jiang Zemin, President of the People's Republic of China, and His Majesty the Sultan of Brunei Darussalam, will open the meeting, which is being jointly hosted by both countries. His Excellency Qian Qichen, the Chinese Vice Premier, will host the closing ceremony.

In her role as Minister of Immigration, Lianne Dalziel will also take the opportunity to visit New Zealand Immigration Service branches in Beijing and Shanghai.

"This is a great opportunity to see the work being done on the ground by our immigration officials overseas," she said.

"For example, many Chinese students are coming to New Zealand for their tertiary education and for English language training. Not only do they get the benefit of our education system, but we get the benefit of learning about another culture. It is a significant relationship which has the potential to develop strong links between our two countries."

Lianne Dalziel will return to New Zealand on Friday, 18 May.