---
title: "Tourism New Zealand Centenary Function"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10730
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The Minister of Tourism Mark Burton is tonight hosting Tourism New Zealand staff from around the world at a Parliamentary function.

Tourism New Zealand has staff located in 11 countries. This week is the first time they have all been brought to New Zealand.

"Parliament is a very appropriate venue for this function," Mark Burton said. "It was 100 years ago – in 1901 - that the New Zealand Government established the Department of Tourist and Health Resorts - the first government department in the world set up to promote tourism.

"One hundred years on, New Zealand continues to be innovative in its approach to tourism. A New Zealand Tourism Strategy has been developed out of a unique partnership between the public and private sector.

"The Strategy maps out a broad direction for sustainable tourism development in the 21st century. That future includes an enhanced role for Tourism New Zealand.

"This first ever gathering of Tourism New Zealand's overseas-based staff has provided a perfect opportunity to discuss the implications of the Strategy recommendations," Mark Burton said.

Overseas-based Tourism New Zealand staff have this week also attended the TRENZ tourism trade show in Christchurch and met with industry representatives, to be updated on new products and services.

"As we move into a new era for Tourism in this country, there will be new challenges for all of Tourism New Zealand's staff. I have no doubt they will embrace the challenge, with the same professionalism and enthusiasm which they now promote our unique and wonderful country to the world," Mark Burton said.