---
title: "Goff to make historic visit to Tibet"
date: 2001-05-27
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10692
ministers:
  - Phil Goff
portfolios:
  - Foreign Affairs and Trade
---

Phil Goff becomes the first New Zealand Foreign Minister to visit Tibet when he leaves for the region tomorrow.

The visit is at the invitation of the Chinese Foreign Minister, Mr Tang as a result of Mr Goff raising human rights concerns about Tibet.

Tibet has been the focus of human rights concerns about the right of the Tibetan people to manage their own affairs and to promote their language, culture and religion. Groups such as Amnesty International have also raised concerns about freedom of speech and prisoners of conscience.

"The visit is a chance to assess conditions in Tibet at first hand and to continue dialogue on human rights issues directly with authorities in Tibet. Both Amnesty International and Friends of Tibet have encouraged me to take up the invitation.

"I go there with an open mind and a readiness to give credit where positive changes are occurring but also to be critical on things that are inconsistent with international human rights standards.

"New Zealand enjoys a good relationship with China and the strength of links – political, trade and people-to-people between our two countries is growing.

"Within the context of that relationship however we have full and frank discussions about issues on which we disagree, including human rights.

"We welcome progress within China including its memorandum of understanding with the United Nations Human Rights Commission, its ratification of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and moves to implement the rule of law.

"A key goal of the visit to Tibet is to learn more about Tibet on the ground and to engage in dialogue with officials to encourage further progress in the area of human rights," Mr Goff said.

The Minister will also visit Hong Kong where he will meet Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa and new Chief Secretary for Administration, Donald Tsang Yam Kuen. Mr Goff will discuss a variety of issues including the proposal for a Closer Economic Partnership agreement with Hong Kong.