---
title: "On-going funding for crucial Tourism Research"
date: 2001-05-21
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10596
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Tourism
---

The Tourism industry's decision-making capability will be greatly enhanced by new Government funding for Tourism research, the Minister of Tourism Mark Burton said today.

"Vote:Tourism will include an additional $600,000 in 2001/02 for research funding, with $800,000 a year in out years.

"These new funds will be managed by the Office of Tourism and Sport for allocation on advice from the Tourism Research Council New Zealand (TRCNZ).

"I established the TRCNZ last year in response to the lack of coordinated, consistent and authoritative research and information available to the tourism sector in New Zealand," Mark Burton said.

"The TRCNZ has already produced the Tourism Satellite Account 1997, which has given us the most accurate measure we have ever had of the size of the tourism sector and its contribution to the New Zealand economy.

"The on-going funding announced today ensures the future of the TRCNZ.

"Among the projects to be supported will be updated Tourism Satellite Accounts, Tourism Forecasting and a Domestic Travel Survey.

"With this funding secure, the full suite of tourism information will be delivered in a coordinated fashion for thee first time.

"This investment will be complimented by TRCNZ's work programme to deliver the results of the research to tourism operators and other users.

"Clearly the tourism sector's decision-making capability will be greatly enhanced by this new funding, which addresses a specific recommendation of the New Zealand Tourism Strategy," Mark Burton said.