---
title: "Digital opportunities at Linwood Intermediate"
date: 2001-05-31
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10746
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - Education
---

Education Minister Trevor Mallard 'switched on' the new Linwood Intermediate study support centre this afternoon to mark its receipt of $50,000 worth of ICT equipment as part of the Government-Business digital opportunities pilot project.

"This is the first rollout of equipment and services to schools," Trevor Mallard said.

"These projects are a partnership between education and business and reflect the absolute need for us to work together to deliver 21st century skills to children of the 21st century.

"The study support centre project is one of four, aimed at bringing broadband internet access to students and communities. Telecom will be donating a Jetstream connection for each school, Compaq is supplying discounted hardware, Renaissance is supplying Smarttools software, and Microsoft is giving free licences for each machine using their software.

"It makes it a really high powered centre. But in return, we have the expectation that the wider community will also benefit from it.

"There will also be a boosted study support centre at Wainoni Primary School and one Invercargill school.

"The Government has committed $10 million to this and three other Digital Opportunities Projects designed to test and develop IT delivery systems and give professional development for teachers.

"Learning through ICT needs to become an integral part of the teaching and learning in our schools and the digital opportunities projects are looking at ways to make sure that all new Zealanders have opportunities in this area," Trevor Mallard said.