---
title: "Government sends letter to dairy farmers"
date: 2001-05-12
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10854
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Agriculture
---

The Government has sent all dairy farmer shareholders of Kiwi Dairies and New Zealand Dairy Group co-operatives a letter setting out clearly the regulatory package that would be implemented if the proposed mega-merger goes ahead, Agriculture Minister Jim Sutton said today.

Farmers vote in eight days' time on whether the proposed merger of the two companies and the Dairy Board should go ahead.

Mr Sutton said he had written to farmers to ensure they had an accurate idea of what the proposed regulatory package was all about.

"If the shareholders vote 'yes', GDC will buy nearly all the raw milk produced in New Zealand. The Government is concerned that this dominance creates the possibility that the company may act like a monopolist which could raise the price of milk to consumers, reduce returns on the shares of producers, and become less innovative than in the past.

"To reduce these risks, the Government has developed the regulatory package, which will be introduced with the legislation enabling the merger."

Mr Sutton said whether the merger proceeded was in the hands of the shareholders of NZ Dairy Group and Kiwi Dairies.

"In deciding to facilitate the merger, the Government has not sought to advise farmers on the merits or otherwise of GDC's proposed business plan and strategy. This is a matter for the shareholders of the dairy companies themselves to decide."

He said that, in theory, other alternative structures were available.

"Nevertheless, the present proposal is the one the industry has put to the Government, and the Government has tried to react constructively to it. It is for the Kiwi Dairies and Dairy Group shareholders to decide whether it proceeds."

The vote is on June 18