---
title: "Judith Tizard's NZ Music Month Challenge"
date: 2001-05-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10437
ministers:
  - Judith Tizard
portfolios:
  - Arts, Culture and Heritage
---

Judith Tizard challenges colleagues to "know their New Zealand music"

Associate Minister for Arts, Culture and Heritage, Judith Tizard, is challenging her fellow MPs to brush up on their knowledge of local music during New Zealand Music Month, which starts today.

"I want my colleagues to buy a local album, catch a live gig, and study up on their New Zealand music trivia. I'll be testing them on their knowledge of the local music scene."

May has been declared New Zealand Music Month by the groups responsible for music in New Zealand. These include the Music Industry Commission, New Zealand on Air, APRA, RIANZ and the Radio Broadcasters' Association.

"I am particularly delighted that the Music Industry Commission is co-ordinating this project," says Judith Tizard. "The Government established the Commission in May last year to foster New Zealand popular music composition, performance, recording and marketing, and promote New Zealand music both here and overseas."

"New Zealand Music Month is exactly the kind of initiative the Government wanted to see when it established the Music Industry Commission and provided extra funding to NZ on Air for its music-related work. Their bright red posters look fantastic out on the streets."

"New Zealand's music is an important part of our national identity, and the ongoing chart success of bands such as Zed and Fur Patrol shows that local music is also a major part of our economic future."

"There is no excuse for not being aware of homegrown music during New Zealand Music Month," says Judith Tizard. "I'll be making sure my colleagues know about the fabulous musical talent in this country with a NZ Music Trivia Questionnaire. I hope other New Zealanders also make an effort to buy an album and see a live performance this month."