---
title: "Opportunities for West Auckland from defence decisions"
date: 2001-05-08
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10613
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Defence
---

There are regional development opportunities for West Auckland arising from today's defence announcements, said the Minister of Defence Mark Burton.

"The Government has today announced its intention to make significant investments in the C-130 Hercules fleet and the Iroquois helicopter fleet currently based at Whenuapai and Hobsonville.

"The Orion fleet will be retained and provided with a limited upgrade. A range of options for replacing the B-727s will be considered, including ownership, leasing or chartering.

"The planned closure of Hobsonville air base requires some changes, and there will be spare capacity overall at RNZAF bases as the air combat force is disbanded," Mark Burton said.

"Consolidating the Air Force at one base is an option. Opportunities could arise for joint military-civilian airfields in support of regional economic development, which could create new jobs and be of considerable benefit to regional industry.

"The Government will commission a study to examine the possibility of opening up Whenuapai air base and operating it as a joint military/civilian facility.

This study is designed to lead to a process for local authorities, regional business leaders, the Air Force and the Government to work together to fully realise the potential of Whenuapai.

"The closure of Hobsonville air base is already opening up exciting opportunities for development in West Auckland. Further opportunities, based around Whenuapai, are also likely to develop from the Government's careful and thorough assessment of New Zealand's defence and security needs," Mark Burton said.