---
title: "Improving security for New Zealanders"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10644
ministers:
  - Matt Robson
portfolios:
  - Corrections
---

The Government is planning for more prisoners, and launching new programmes to reduce the level of re-offending after release.

Corrections Minister Matt Robson has announced funding of $7.6 million \[operational] and $48.3 million \[capital] over the next four years for proposed men's and women's correctional facilities in South Auckland.

He is also launching new assessment and treatment programmes for alcohol and substance abuse, and for behavioural problems that lead to repeated serious traffic offending.

"The Government is keeping the public safe by tackling the problem from both ends.  
A new Sentencing and Parole Bill will help to improve security for New Zealanders by keeping dangerous offenders in prison for longer. We are building new prisons to meet the increase. And new treatment programmes will help reduce re-offending," Matt Robson said.

The operating funding component for the South Auckland project will be spent on applications for resource consents and the design and commissioning. Capital costs are for the purchase of the sites and the construction of the women's facility in South Auckland. The capital cost for the men's facility will be approved once a site is finally selected and following further design work.

$ million 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 New Operating 3.660 3.380   0.560 New capital 25.400 21.400 1.500  

Funding to reduce re-offending totals $7 million over four years. \[$2.2 million in 2001-02, $1.8 million in 02-03, and $1.5 million in 03-04 and 04-05.]