---
title: "Strategy announced to harvest Tairawhiti's wall-of-wood"
date: 2001-05-25
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10694
ministers:
  - Parekura Horomia
portfolios:
  - Social Development and Employment
---

A three-way partnership between the government, Tairawhiti communities and industry to bridge labour and skill shortages holding back the development of the forestry industry on the East Coast was announced by social services and employment ministers Steve Maharey and Parekura Horomia in Gisborne this afternoon.

A strong, vital forestry industry was identified as critical to the achievement of sustainable employment and economic growth in the region by the Tairawhiti Development Taskforce established last year by Deputy Prime Minister Jim Anderton. Labour and skills shortages were seen as a major issue constraining the growth of the forestry industry.

The Ministers said the strategy announced today involved the industry, the local community and the government taking ownership of both the issues and solutions - because working in isolation none alone would solve the problem.

"The underlying causes of labour and skills shortages in the forestry industry in Tairawhiti are complex and interrelated. This strategy tackles the issues head-on," said Jim Anderton.

Four key issues were identified by a Department of Labour report commissioned by the Wood Processing Strategy Group which Mr Anderton chaired:  
\* the need to improve communication and co-ordination between the key players in the local industry;  
\* the potential for benefit payments or seasonal jobs to provide an attractive alternative to the demands of forestry work;  
\* low pay, high physical demands, health and safety issues and a perception that the forestry does not provide an attractive career path affects recruitment into the industry; and,  
\* a lack of skills and poor work discipline amongst the available and potential workforce linked to in some cases to drug and alcohol use.

Mr Maharey and Mr Horomia said the strategy adopts a multi-pronged approach to counter these problems:  
$120,000 will be provided by Industry New Zealand to employ a full-time coordinator for 12 months.  
new training programmes in literacy, numeracy and silviculture to prepare job seekers for careers in the forestry industry;  
new Budget initiatives aimed at Making Work Pay make it financially more attractive to move off welfare and into real paying jobs in forestry;  
work with contractors on how to be a good employer; and,  
working with local social service providers on a range of local problems, including substance abuse.

"Effective partnerships are the key to caring for and harvesting Tairawhiti's wall-of-wood. Smart governments know that they can't solve the problems by themselves remotely from Wellington, but we are prepared to back local communities and the industry to make the changes that meet local needs," Steve Maharey said.

Mr Horomia said as a local MP he was well aware that unlocking the enormous economic potential of the region's forestry assets was the key to building a strong economic base for the people of the region.

"In the Tairawhiti region, and across Ikaroa-Rawhiti, our people know that the best welfare policy is a job and that communities grow stronger when education and employment levels are raised. The Labour-Alliance Government has made a strong commitment to this region and the onus is now on us to seize the opportunities and move forward," Mr Horomia said.