---
title: "Govt considers information on physical punishment of children"
date: 2001-05-04
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10454
ministers:
  - Laila Harré
portfolios:
  - Youth Affairs
---

Associate Education (Tertiary Education) Minister Steve Maharey has responded to inaccurate allegations by the New Zealand University Students' Association (NZUSA) about the setting of the 2001/02 headline interest rate.

The headline interest rate for the 2001/02 tax year, which was first set under a new formula arising from the student loan interest rate review, was announced on February 27th. Under the previous formula the interest rate would have risen to 7.9%.

"NZUSA has drawn attention to the fact that the new headline interest rate includes a larger than usual inflation adjustment (3.9%).

"This reflects the rate of CPI increase in December 2001, which has always been the basis on which the inflation adjustment was set. Contrary to NZUSA's claims, I made this quite clear in a Factsheet issued at the time the interest rate was announced (attached).

"NZUSA has suggested that the 2001/02 interest rate has disadvantaged low-income borrowers. In actuality, most borrowers are much better off this year.

"The headline interest rate is the highest rate that borrowers can possibly pay. Only a relatively small minority of borrowers actually face the headline rate, but those that do will benefit from lower interest under the new formula.

"All full-time or low-income part-time students benefit from a full interest write-off. The abolition of interest for this group has been a major initiative of the Labour/Alliance Government and has cost over $400 million over 4 years."

"Another group of students benefit from the new rule that at least 50% of repayments (above of the inflation adjustment) go to pay off the principal, and any remaining interest is written off.

"A minority of students, however, do face a reduced base interest write-off this year because base interest is a smaller proportion of the total interest rate than previously. The impact of this varies from year to year based on the rate of inflation," Steve Maharey said.