---
title: "Decision Made Regarding Future Services for People at Braemar Hospital"
date: 2001-05-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10793
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Health Minister Annette King announced today that alternative living options would be developed for people currently living at Braemar Hospital.

"The report presented to me by the Ministry of Health and Nelson Marlborough District Health Board concluded that people living at Braemar hospital would benefit from a range of more appropriate and personalised community-based living options," said Mrs King. "I support that recommendation, including the possibility of a small cluster of houses on the existing Braemar site."

Carol Searle, Deputy-Director General at the Ministry of Health, said the Ministry would continue to meet the costs of support services for people when they moved into more community-based services.

"We will be funding 24-hour staff support in all the new houses, as well as specialist support services for those who need them," said Mrs Searle. "We are aiming for all the necessary planning to be completed in time for the first planned move of people from Braemar beginning early next year.

"All going well we aim for all people to be resettled into their new services by the end of March 2003. However, I can assure you that people will not be moving into any new services until all the necessary supports are in place. We will also be funding an advocacy service to be available for families," said Mrs Searle.

Nelson Marlborough District Health Board CEO Glenys Baldick said the DHB supported the move to community-based services as people would have much better level of support and more individualised services.

"This will mean changes for both the people who live at Braemar Hospital and changes for the staff. Change can be difficult. However, we will ensure that it will be well managed," said Mrs Baldick.

"There has been a lot of work done leading up to this decision. Now, however, we are into the implementation phase, which requires setting up a transition team to manage the process of developing the new services.

"Braemer residents, families and staff will all be involved in this, particularly in planning where people want to live, who they prefer to live with, what they would like to do during the day and what other support was needed.

"We have also been very clear with families that as part of these changes no families will be asked to take their family member home to live with them. These will be fully funded services. In the new services each person will also have their own room unless they prefer to share," said Mrs Baldick.

The decision to move to community residential services was made following a review of services at Braemar Hospital. This process included a review of existing assessments of all Braemar residents.

To ensure that all the necessary background work is done, the next phase of planning will begin straight away. The Nelson Marlborough DHB will appoint a transition team manager in the very near future, and the Ministry will appoint an independent advocate to provide support for clients and their family members through the changes.

End

For further information contact

Gerard Vaughan  
Ministry of Health  
04 496 2064 or 025 402965