---
title: "Ministerial Advisory Committee on Agrichemical Trespass"
date: 2001-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10590
ministers:
  - Marian Hobbs
portfolios:
  - Environment
---

The Minister for the Environment, Marian Hobbs, has announced the members of the Agrichemical Trespass Ministerial Advisory Committee as a further step towards dealing with the issues surrounding the effects of ‘off-target’ agricultural chemicals.

"The Government realises that events such as spraydrift from agricultural chemicals are a concern for many people, who want action to control it," Marian Hobbs said. "We need to work out how we can prevent chemicals going where they were not intended, such as to neighbours, passers-by, nearby organic orchards or vineyards.

"I have appointed this advisory committee to look at the risks related to crops and livestock being exposed accidentally to agricultural chemicals. This is a particular concern for organic producers, as it can affect their ability to market their products."

Marian Hobbs said the committee has been asked to report in two stages, within four months on immediate solutions and within eight months on more long-term solutions.

The 10 members of the committee represent a broad range of interests and expertise. Robert Priest, Deputy Chief Executive of Environment Waikato, will chair the committee.

Other members are:  
Helen Atkins, lawyer;  
Alan Cliffe, agrichemical producer and applicator;  
Dr Francesca Kelly, medical/public health expert;  
Richard Kempthorn, fruit/vegetable grower;  
John Maber, technical expert and educator;  
Graham McBride, Waikato farmer;  
Audrey Severinsen, Mayor Manawatu District Council and farmer;  
Percy Tipene, organic farmer who will also bring a Maori perspective;  
Meriel Watts, Director of Soil & Health, Convenor of the Chemical Trespass Coalition, Member of the Pesticide Action Network.

"This is just one part of the government action to improve management of hazardous substances," Marian Hobbs said. "As I recently announced, the hazardous substances part of the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996 will come into force in July, and will ensure thorough evaluation of new chemicals before they are introduced. The Ministry for the Environment is also developing a pesticide reduction strategy."