---
title: "Heartland Service Centre planned for Turangi"
date: 2001-05-11
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10511
ministers:
  - Mark Burton
portfolios:
  - Unassigned Portfolio
---

Turangi and Taupo could both benefit from a decision to bring Government services together in a "one-stop shop" concept, Taupo MP Mark Burton said.

A Heartland Services Centre has been opened in Dargaville, the first of 10 such centres to be opened in provincial locations around the country before Christmas.

"Turangi is one of the 10 locations which will get a centre this year, and interest has also been shown from Taupo in joining the programme," Mark Burton said.

“Heartland Services is a new government initiative which restores face to face access to a range of government services in provincial communities.

"The sorts of agencies being brought together are Department of Work and Income, Child, Youth and Family, ACC, Housing New Zealand, Inland Revenue and the Maori Land Court. Other Government Departments have also been invited to participate.

"Over recent years small towns have experienced a flight of government services. Heartland Service Centre coordinators will provide the link between local people making enquiries, and government agencies. A public telephone and computer will be provided at each centre and the coordinator can help with general enquiries, including accessing government websites for job searches and other information.

"As the concept develops, it is hoped the role of the Service Centre may be expanded to serve as a community resource centre.

“Heartland Service Centres will make links to government agencies a whole lot easier, friendlier and better coordinated," Mark Burton said.