---
title: "Questions and Answers on NGO guidelines"
date: 2001-05-18
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10581
ministers:
  - Trevor Mallard
portfolios:
  - State Services
---

What's an NGO?

A non-government organisation. For the purposes of these guidelines, it includes:

· community or voluntary organisations  
· Maori, iwi and hapu organisations  
· for-profit organisations where Government organisations contract with them for the delivery of service outputs

Why do we need guidelines for contracting with NGOS?

The Guidelines are part of a wider effort to improve the way in which government agencies manage their relationships and dealings with all NGOs.

For some time, the Government has had some concerns about how state agencies contract with NGOs, including whether the contracting processes reflect the relationships based on cooperation and trust that the Government is seeking to have with the voluntary sector; whether contracting arrangements give enough weight to the Government's objectives; whether compliance costs for community organisations are too high; when it's appropriate for contracting to include capacity building for the provider; and how to ensure appropriate accountability for public money.

In addition, following an investigation into contracting issues with the Waipareira Trust, the Controller and Auditor-General recommended that guidelines be developed for all Government agencies that contracted with NGOs. These guidelines would cover in particular the selection of appropriate recipients of Government funding; arranging purchasing and contracting arrangements between funders and NGOs; monitoring by funders of contracted service delivery by NGOs; and evaluating the outcome of government-funded activities.

What else is the Government doing to address these issues?

The community and voluntary sector working party chaired by Dorothy Wilson has recently reported to the Minister of Social Services and Employment on measures to improve relationships between NGOs and government agencies.

In addition, the Government's statement of expectations of and commitment to the state sector issued on 11 March provide clearer guidance to government agencies about government expectations in this area. For instance, it emphasises that state sector agencies and individuals should act with integrity, respect people as citizens and clients and be responsive to the community by demonstrating a commitment to service.

There has also been work initiated to improve state sector performance generally, particularly on strengthening the centre of Government, as recommended by the Standards Board.

How will the Guidelines be used?

The Guidelines have been written explicitly for use by government agencies, including all departments and Crown entities. There is a clear expectation that, while the Guidelines are not mandatory, government agencies should stick to them closely, unless there's good reason not to. Government agencies will also be invited by Ministers to review their contracting practices in the light of the guidelines.

The guidelines are not intended to cover purchases of inputs, such as stationery and IT services, for which other guidelines and advice are available.

Who drafted the Guidelines?

Treasury drafted the Guidelines in consultation with departments and after consultation with NGOs themselves.

Who was consulted in the preparation of the Guidelines?

In preparing the Guidelines, Treasury consulted with more than 30 NGOs including:

· umbrella organisations, including with some of their affiliates (eg NZ Federation of Voluntary Welfare Organisations, NZ Council of Social Services, NZ Council of Christian Social Services, Disabled Persons Assembly)

· iwi/Maori Service providers (eg Waipareira Trust, NZ Maori Women's Welfare League, Ngati Awa Social and Health Services Trust)

· service providers (eg YMCA, IHC)

· commercial service providers (eg Procare)

Treasury also worked with a number of other government departments with a close interest in the Guidelines including the Office of the Controller and Auditor General, the State Services Commission, Te Puni Kokiri, and the Ministry of Social Policy. The community and voluntary sector working party was also consulted.

What were the main issues identified in the course of the consultation?

The main issues raised in the consultation with NGOs and government agencies were:

· building better relationships between agencies and NGOs, recognising that the contract is only one part of the relationship

· ensuring that while government agencies need to actively seek value for money, NGOs need to cover the full cost of the services provided - and driving prices down may sometimes undermine capability and service quality

· ensuring government agencies take into account the capability of NGOs in building relationships and negotiating contracts  
· ensuring government agencies strike a fair balance between fostering competition (a fair chance to compete, better value for money, transparency) and cooperation (better relationships, better service structures and working jointly with several NGOs)

· ensuring government agencies monitor and review contracts, while keeping the compliance costs of NGOs manageable

· providing guidance on working with iwi/Maori and hapu.

What's the status of the Guidelines?

The Guidelines are issued by Treasury to reflect government expectations of government agencies.

The Guidelines are not mandatory, as government agencies need scope to negotiate contracts that are appropriate to a wide variety of relationships and NGOs, and because it is desirable to maintain the accountability of government agency Chief Executives.

Nevertheless, agencies will be expected to stick to the best practice outlined in the Guidelines, unless there are good reasons otherwise. The Office of the Controller and Auditor General will be able to refer to the Guidelines when examining contractual issues between government agencies and NGOs.

Who will they apply to?

The Guidelines will be issued to all government departments and most Crown entities. Some Crown entities such as schools and Reserves Boards will not be issued with the Guidelines, as they have little relevant contracting activity.

The Guidelines may be of use to other government agencies, such as Officers of Parliament, and copies will be made available to these agencies.

The Guidelines do not apply to SOEs or Crown companies, as these have been established to operate within well-established commercial frameworks.

Why aren't there guidelines for NGOs?

There were some suggestions during the consultation process that guidelines should also be written for NGOs.

However, the Government's focus should be on the conduct of its own agencies. It would be inconsistent with the new relationships being sought for the government to attempt to determine guidelines directly for NGOs.

NGOs nevertheless can use the Guidelines as an indication of the government's expectations of its agencies, and to help NGOs identify issues to consider in developing the contractual part of their relationships with government agencies.

What do the Guidelines aim to do?

The Guidelines seek to promote a mature and constructive relationship with the community and voluntary sector, and to ensure the government and NGOs get mutual benefit from the money spent on government objectives and that there is accountability for public money.

What are the key points?

The Guidelines have been written to reflect the following principles:  
· Services purchased through contracts and other types of funding relationships should contribute to the achievement of government outcomes and objectives. NGOs will similarly expect contracting arrangements to contribute to the achievement of their objectives.  
· Contracting should reflect the needs of the ultimate users or recipients of the service.  
· Contracts should provide appropriate accountability for public money and money sourced from third parties.  
· Contracts should represent value for public money. The quality of service delivery will usually be of central importance.  
· The Crown and its organisations should act in good faith.  
· Government agencies should understand the nature of the organisations that they and the Crown contract with. Contracting and funding relationships with the community organisations should be consistent with the relationship the government seeks to have with the community and voluntary sector. This means:  
\- recognising the objectives of both parties  
\- respecting the autonomy of the voluntary sector  
\- communicating in an open and timely manner  
\- working constructively together  
\- recognising the responsibilities of each party to its stakeholders.

How will compliance with the Guidelines be monitored?

Given the non-mandatory nature of the Guidelines, direct monitoring is not proposed. However, Government agencies can expect the NGOs they deal with to seek conduct broadly consistent with the Guidelines. There will also be a review in 2002 of how the Guidelines are working, which should indicate levels of compliance.

How will we know whether the Guidelines are working?

The Guidelines and their effectiveness will be reviewed by October 2002, by officials in consultation with NGOs, and reported back to Cabinet. The review will examine the extent to which the Guidelines have improved relationships with NGOs; contracting practices; value for money from contracts; government outcomes; accountability and compliance costs for NGOs. It will also recommend any revisions to the Guidelines needed to improve their effectiveness.

Where can I get copies?

Copies of the Guidelines can be found on the Treasury website at www.treasury.govt.nz, or by calling the Treasury's Publications Unit on 471 5109.