---
title: "Youth Suicide Prevention Budget Package"
date: 2001-05-24
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10743
ministers:
  - Laila Harré
portfolios:
  - Youth Affairs
---

Youth Suicide prevention programmes will receive a $1.673 million boost in this year's budget, Youth Affairs Minister Laila Harré announced this morning.

"The package contains three initiatives that bring us a step closer to meeting the aims of the Youth Suicide Prevention Strategy, the government's blueprint for reducing the unacceptably high rate of youth suicide in New Zealand. " Laila Harré said

It includes a new service to help and monitor young people already identified as at risk, the extension of a programme aimed at increasing the availability of youth suicide prevention training and information and the maintenance of a development programme that supports young people within their local communities.

Two of the three initiatives will be funded by new money, a total of $1.2 million. The third will be funded from current baseline provisions within the Department of Internal Affairs.

The funding will be ongoing.

The package includes:

· $500,000 (Vote Youth Affairs) for the continuation and expansion of Suicide Prevention Information New Zealand community information programme.

· $700,000 (Vote Child Youth and Family Service) for a new monitoring and case audit system.

· $473,000 (Vote Department of Internal Affairs) for the continuation of the community-based Youth Development Fund.

Laila Harré said the three initiatives reflect the Labour-Alliance Coalition's holistic approach to youth suicide prevention. This includes an emphasis on the healthy development and active support of all young people, as well as early warning systems to identify potential crisis situations.

"Youth suicide is a complex issue that requires a multi-faceted approach, and that's why this package contains initiatives that focus on both the short term, in the form of crisis intervention, support and monitoring, and the long term in the form of youth and community development programmes."

The package will also complement the youth suicide prevention initiatives that are currently operating across government departments, Laila Harré said.

The budget announcement coincides with the appointment of a National Youth Suicide Prevention Coordinator, part of the transfer of leadership of the National Youth Suicide Prevention Strategy to the Ministry of Youth Affairs earlier this year.