---
title: "New Zealanders smoking less"
date: 2001-05-30
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10766
ministers:
  - Annette King
portfolios:
  - Health
---

Tobacco consumption in New Zealand fell dramatically over the past year, particularly in the months following last May's tobacco tax increase, Minister of Health Annette King announced today (Thursday, 31 May), marking World Smokefree Day.

"New Zealanders are smoking less than every before, which will have huge benefits for everyone's health," said Mrs King. "Last year's tax increase appears to have helped deliver this result, along with a number of quit programmes that have also been put in place or enhanced by this Government. I'd encourage people to continue to take the next step and quit for good."

Early indications are that tobacco consumption fell by at least 10 percent, possibly much more, during 2000. However, following the 2000 Budget, tobacco products released for consumption dropped 18 percent between July 2000 and March 2001, compared with the same period 12 months earlier.

The fall in tobacco consumption is believed largely due to the 14 per cent tax increase in May 2000, which increased the price of a pack of 20 cigarettes by $1. The tobacco industry imposed an additional increase at the same time.

The percentage of New Zealanders who smoke continues its general downwards trend - from 26 percent in 1999 to 25 percent in 2000, according to survey results.

Although smokers are cutting back, a quarter of New Zealanders aged over 15 -- including one in two Maori adults -- continued to smoke in 2000. The average number of cigarettes smoked per smoker per day fell from 13 to 12 between 1997 and 2000.