---
title: "Minister secures $10m for permanent Conservation public awareness programme"
date: 2001-05-09
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/10496
ministers:
  - Jim Sutton
portfolios:
  - Agriculture
---

Conservation Minister Sandra Lee has secured $10m1 for a wide-ranging conservation public awareness programme over the next four years. The programme builds on the one-off funding allocated to the Department of Conservation in the last Budget.

"Because we care about our country's national parks and reserves, and unique species like the Kiwi, most New Zealanders want to be able to make a personal difference to conservation. This funding programme will increase opportunities for everyone to contribute. It will also allow community-driven conservation projects to flourish, and we hope it will prompt new partnerships between DOC and local communities," Ms Lee said. "The programme includes a special focus on our major cities, in particular Auckland. Urban populations can feel isolated from our conservation heritage, so we need to pay special attention to finding creative ways of making a conservation connection for people who do not have national parks on their doorstep," she said.

"Last year, DOC was able to reach many new people when the Government approved a one-off pilot initiative. It is important to see this new funding as an opportunity for DOC not only to build on past successes but also to focus on developing new ways of working with communities. This means that while some existing projects may continue, I expect other new projects will be developed."

Ms Lee said DOC would also use some of this funding to address how it could better share information with the public, and use appropriate electronic communication methods like the Internet. She says the funding for public awareness programmes will complement the funding for initiatives to promote biodiversity on private land, announced in the last Budget.