---
title: "SH2 upgrade between Napier and Gisborne"
date: 2012-10-02
url: https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/sh2-upgrade-between-napier-and-gisborne
ministers:
  - Gerry Brownlee
portfolios:
  - Transport
---

Transport Minister Gerry Brownlee has announced Cabinet approval for $4 million of funding for the design and construction of passing opportunities on State Highway 2 between Napier and Gisborne.

“I acknowledge concerns about getting freight in and out of the Gisborne region in the most cost effective way since the Napier to Gisborne rail line closed north of Wairoa in March following storm damage, and the subsequent decision by KiwiRail to mothball the line.

“That’s why the Government is investing up to $4 million on top of what’s already available through the National Land Transport Programme for the road,” Mr Brownlee says.

The NZ Transport Agency will complete the design of a series of passing opportunities in the next few months.  The areas of State Highway 2 under consideration for passing opportunities are Kopua Hill and several locations between Lake Tutira and Te Ngaru.  The total cost of the design and construction is estimated at between $3 and $4 million.

The National Land Transport Programme has also allocated $9 to $10 million over the next three years to improve the condition of the road and maintain State Highway 2 to modern highway standards.  This investment will be targeted at the sections where most improvement is needed.

“I also recognise the added importance the State highway will now play as the key link between Napier and Gisborne and therefore priority must be given to ensuring the route continues to deliver the required support for current and future use,” Mr Brownlee says.

Additional road traffic generated by mothballing the rail line is not expected to have a significant impact on the State highway.  It is estimated that the 50,000 tonnes of freight carried annually on the rail line before March has resulted in approximately five extra trucks using the road each day.

As well as the passing opportunities, the NZ Transport Agency will increase its monitoring of the impact of heavy traffic on the condition of the road.

For more information on the State Highway 2 upgrades visit [www.nzta.govt.nz](http://www.nzta.govt.nz).